start of the project gutenberg ebook 11  illustration alices adventures in wonderland by lewis carroll the millennium fulcrum edition 3.0 contents chapter i. down the rabbithole chapter ii.
the pool of tears chapter iii.
a caucusrace and a long tale chapter iv.
the rabbit sends in a little bill chapter v. advice from a caterpillar chapter vi.
pig and pepper chapter vii.
a mad teaparty chapter viii.
the queens croquetground chapter ix.
the mock turtles story chapter x. the lobster quadrille chapter xi.
who stole the tarts?
chapter xii.
alices evidence chapter i. down the rabbithole alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the bank, and of having nothing to do: once or twice she had peeped into the book her sister was reading, but it had no pictures or conversations in it, and what is the use of a book, thought alice without pictures or conversations?
so she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could, for the hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether the pleasure of making a daisychain would be worth the trouble of getting up and picking the daisies, when suddenly a white rabbit with pink eyes ran close by her.
there was nothing so very remarkable in that; nor did alice think it so very much out of the way to hear the rabbit say to itself, oh dear!
oh dear!
i shall be late!
(when she thought it over afterwards, it occurred to her that she ought to have wondered at this, but at the time it all seemed quite natural); but when the rabbit actually took a watch out of its waistcoatpocket, and looked at it, and then hurried on, alice started to her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had never before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoatpocket, or a watch to take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran across the field after it, and fortunately was just in time to see it pop down a large rabbithole under the hedge.
in another moment down went alice after it, never once considering how in the world she was to get out again.
the rabbithole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, and then dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that alice had not a moment to think about stopping herself before she found herself falling down a very deep well.
either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she had plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to wonder what was going to happen next.
first, she tried to look down and make out what she was coming to, but it was too dark to see anything; then she looked at the sides of the well, and noticed that they were filled with cupboards and bookshelves; here and there she saw maps and pictures hung upon pegs.
she took down a jar from one of the shelves as she passed; it was labelled orange marmalade, but to her great disappointment it was empty: she did not like to drop the jar for fear of killing somebody underneath, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as she fell past it.
well!
thought alice to herself, after such a fall as this, i shall think nothing of tumbling down stairs!
how brave theyll all think me at home!
why, i wouldnt say anything about it, even if i fell off the top of the house!
(which was very likely true.)
down, down, down.
would the fall never come to an end?
i wonder how many miles ive fallen by this time?
she said aloud.
i must be getting somewhere near the centre of the earth.
let me see: that would be four thousand miles down, i think (for, you see, alice had learnt several things of this sort in her lessons in the schoolroom, and though this was not a very good opportunity for showing off her knowledge, as there was no one to listen to her, still it was good practice to say it over) yes, thats about the right distancebut then i wonder what latitude or longitude ive got to?
(alice had no idea what latitude was, or longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to say.)
presently she began again.
i wonder if i shall fall right through the earth!
how funny itll seem to come out among the people that walk with their heads downward!
the antipathies, i think (she was rather glad there was no one listening, this time, as it didnt sound at all the right word) but i shall have to ask them what the name of the country is, you know.
please, maam, is this new zealand or australia?
(and she tried to curtsey as she spokefancy curtseying as youre falling through the air!
do you think you could manage it?)
and what an ignorant little girl shell think me for asking!
no, itll never do to ask: perhaps i shall see it written up somewhere.
down, down, down.
there was nothing else to do, so alice soon began talking again.
dinahll miss me very much tonight, i should think!
(dinah was the cat.)
i hope theyll remember her saucer of milk at teatime.
dinah my dear!
i wish you were down here with me!
there are no mice in the air, im afraid, but you might catch a bat, and thats very like a mouse, you know.
but do cats eat bats, i wonder?
and here alice began to get rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of way, do cats eat bats?
do cats eat bats?
and sometimes, do bats eat cats?
for, you see, as she couldnt answer either question, it didnt much matter which way she put it.
she felt that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she was walking hand in hand with dinah, and saying to her very earnestly, now, dinah, tell me the truth: did you ever eat a bat?
when suddenly, thump!
thump!
down she came upon a heap of sticks and dry leaves, and the fall was over.
alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a moment: she looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her was another long passage, and the white rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down it.
there was not a moment to be lost: away went alice like the wind, and was just in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, oh my ears and whiskers, how late its getting!
she was close behind it when she turned the corner, but the rabbit was no longer to be seen: she found herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging from the roof.
there were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and when alice had been all the way down one side and up the other, trying every door, she walked sadly down the middle, wondering how she was ever to get out again.
suddenly she came upon a little threelegged table, all made of solid glass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key, and alices first thought was that it might belong to one of the doors of the hall; but, alas!
either the locks were too large, or the key was too small, but at any rate it would not open any of them.
however, on the second time round, she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a little door about fifteen inches high: she tried the little golden key in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!
alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passage, not much larger than a rathole: she knelt down and looked along the passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw.
how she longed to get out of that dark hall, and wander about among those beds of bright flowers and those cool fountains, but she could not even get her head through the doorway; and even if my head would go through, thought poor alice, it would be of very little use without my shoulders.
oh, how i wish i could shut up like a telescope!
i think i could, if i only knew how to begin.
for, you see, so many outoftheway things had happened lately, that alice had begun to think that very few things indeed were really impossible.
there seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she went back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on it, or at any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like telescopes: this time she found a little bottle on it, (which certainly was not here before, said alice,) and round the neck of the bottle was a paper label, with the words drink me, beautifully printed on it in large letters.
it was all very well to say drink me, but the wise little alice was not going to do that in a hurry.
no, ill look first, she said, and see whether its marked poison or not; for she had read several nice little histories about children who had got burnt, and eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant things, all because they would not remember the simple rules their friends had taught them: such as, that a redhot poker will burn you if you hold it too long; and that if you cut your finger very deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds; and she had never forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked poison, it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or later.
however, this bottle was not marked poison, so alice ventured to taste it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed flavour of cherrytart, custard, pineapple, roast turkey, toffee, and hot buttered toast,) she very soon finished it off.
what a curious feeling!
said alice; i must be shutting up like a telescope.
and so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for going through the little door into that lovely garden.
first, however, she waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink any further: she felt a little nervous about this; for it might end, you know, said alice to herself, in my going out altogether, like a candle.
i wonder what i should be like then?
and she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle is like after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember ever having seen such a thing.
after a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going into the garden at once; but, alas for poor alice!
when she got to the door, she found she had forgotten the little golden key, and when she went back to the table for it, she found she could not possibly reach it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her best to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery; and when she had tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing sat down and cried.
come, theres no use in crying like that!
said alice to herself, rather sharply; i advise you to leave off this minute!
she generally gave herself very good advice, (though she very seldom followed it), and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into her eyes; and once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having cheated herself in a game of croquet she was playing against herself, for this curious child was very fond of pretending to be two people.
but its no use now, thought poor alice, to pretend to be two people!
why, theres hardly enough of me left to make one respectable person!
soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table: she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on which the words eat me were beautifully marked in currants.
well, ill eat it, said alice, and if it makes me grow larger, i can reach the key; and if it makes me grow smaller, i can creep under the door; so either way ill get into the garden, and i dont care which happens!
she ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself, which way?
which way?, holding her hand on the top of her head to feel which way it was growing, and she was quite surprised to find that she remained the same size: to be sure, this generally happens when one eats cake, but alice had got so much into the way of expecting nothing but outoftheway things to happen, that it seemed quite dull and stupid for life to go on in the common way.
so she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.
chapter ii.
the pool of tears curiouser and curiouser!
cried alice (she was so much surprised, that for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good english); now im opening out like the largest telescope that ever was!
goodbye, feet!
(for when she looked down at her feet, they seemed to be almost out of sight, they were getting so far off).
oh, my poor little feet, i wonder who will put on your shoes and stockings for you now, dears?
im sure i shant be able!
i shall be a great deal too far off to trouble myself about you: you must manage the best way you can;but i must be kind to them, thought alice, or perhaps they wont walk the way i want to go!
let me see: ill give them a new pair of boots every christmas.
and she went on planning to herself how she would manage it.
they must go by the carrier, she thought; and how funny itll seem, sending presents to ones own feet!
and how odd the directions will look!
alices right foot, esq., hearthrug, near the fender, (with alices love).
oh dear, what nonsense im talking!
just then her head struck against the roof of the hall: in fact she was now more than nine feet high, and she at once took up the little golden key and hurried off to the garden door.
poor alice!
it was as much as she could do, lying down on one side, to look through into the garden with one eye; but to get through was more hopeless than ever: she sat down and began to cry again.
you ought to be ashamed of yourself, said alice, a great girl like you, (she might well say this), to go on crying in this way!
stop this moment, i tell you!
but she went on all the same, shedding gallons of tears, until there was a large pool all round her, about four inches deep and reaching half down the hall.
after a time she heard a little pattering of feet in the distance, and she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming.
it was the white rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a pair of white kid gloves in one hand and a large fan in the other: he came trotting along in a great hurry, muttering to himself as he came, oh!
the duchess, the duchess!
oh!
wont she be savage if ive kept her waiting!
alice felt so desperate that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the rabbit came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, if you please, sir the rabbit started violently, dropped the white kid gloves and the fan, and skurried away into the darkness as hard as he could go.
alice took up the fan and gloves, and, as the hall was very hot, she kept fanning herself all the time she went on talking: dear, dear!
how queer everything is today!
and yesterday things went on just as usual.
i wonder if ive been changed in the night?
let me think: was i the same when i got up this morning?
i almost think i can remember feeling a little different.
but if im not the same, the next question is, who in the world am i?
ah, thats the great puzzle!
and she began thinking over all the children she knew that were of the same age as herself, to see if she could have been changed for any of them.
im sure im not ada, she said, for her hair goes in such long ringlets, and mine doesnt go in ringlets at all; and im sure i cant be mabel, for i know all sorts of things, and she, oh!
she knows such a very little!
besides, shes she, and im i, andoh dear, how puzzling it all is!
ill try if i know all the things i used to know.
let me see: four times five is twelve, and four times six is thirteen, and four times seven isoh dear!
i shall never get to twenty at that rate!
however, the multiplication table doesnt signify: lets try geography.
london is the capital of paris, and paris is the capital of rome, and romeno, thats all wrong, im certain!
i must have been changed for mabel!
ill try and say how doth the little and she crossed her hands on her lap as if she were saying lessons, and began to repeat it, but her voice sounded hoarse and strange, and the words did not come the same as they used to do: how doth the little crocodile improve his shining tail, and pour the waters of the nile on every golden scale!
how cheerfully he seems to grin, how neatly spread his claws, and welcome little fishes in with gently smiling jaws!
im sure those are not the right words, said poor alice, and her eyes filled with tears again as she went on, i must be mabel after all, and i shall have to go and live in that poky little house, and have next to no toys to play with, and oh!
ever so many lessons to learn!
no, ive made up my mind about it; if im mabel, ill stay down here!
itll be no use their putting their heads down and saying come up again, dear!
i shall only look up and say who am i then?
tell me that first, and then, if i like being that person, ill come up: if not, ill stay down here till im somebody elsebut, oh dear!
cried alice, with a sudden burst of tears, i do wish they would put their heads down!
i am so very tired of being all alone here!
as she said this she looked down at her hands, and was surprised to see that she had put on one of the rabbits little white kid gloves while she was talking.
how can i have done that?
she thought.
i must be growing small again.
she got up and went to the table to measure herself by it, and found that, as nearly as she could guess, she was now about two feet high, and was going on shrinking rapidly: she soon found out that the cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she dropped it hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.
that was a narrow escape!
said alice, a good deal frightened at the sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in existence; and now for the garden!
and she ran with all speed back to the little door: but, alas!
the little door was shut again, and the little golden key was lying on the glass table as before, and things are worse than ever, thought the poor child, for i never was so small as this before, never!
and i declare its too bad, that it is!
as she said these words her foot slipped, and in another moment, splash!
she was up to her chin in salt water.
her first idea was that she had somehow fallen into the sea, and in that case i can go back by railway, she said to herself.
(alice had been to the seaside once in her life, and had come to the general conclusion, that wherever you go to on the english coast you find a number of bathing machines in the sea, some children digging in the sand with wooden spades, then a row of lodging houses, and behind them a railway station.)
however, she soon made out that she was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she was nine feet high.
i wish i hadnt cried so much!
said alice, as she swam about, trying to find her way out.
i shall be punished for it now, i suppose, by being drowned in my own tears!
that will be a queer thing, to be sure!
however, everything is queer today.
just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a little way off, and she swam nearer to make out what it was: at first she thought it must be a walrus or hippopotamus, but then she remembered how small she was now, and she soon made out that it was only a mouse that had slipped in like herself.
would it be of any use, now, thought alice, to speak to this mouse?
everything is so outoftheway down here, that i should think very likely it can talk: at any rate, theres no harm in trying.
so she began: o mouse, do you know the way out of this pool?
i am very tired of swimming about here, o mouse!
(alice thought this must be the right way of speaking to a mouse: she had never done such a thing before, but she remembered having seen in her brothers latin grammar, a mouseof a mouseto a mousea mouseo mouse!)
the mouse looked at her rather inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink with one of its little eyes, but it said nothing.
perhaps it doesnt understand english, thought alice; i daresay its a french mouse, come over with william the conqueror.
(for, with all her knowledge of history, alice had no very clear notion how long ago anything had happened.)
so she began again: o est ma chatte?
which was the first sentence in her french lessonbook.
the mouse gave a sudden leap out of the water, and seemed to quiver all over with fright.
oh, i beg your pardon!
cried alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the poor animals feelings.
i quite forgot you didnt like cats.
not like cats!
cried the mouse, in a shrill, passionate voice.
would you like cats if you were me?
well, perhaps not, said alice in a soothing tone: dont be angry about it.
and yet i wish i could show you our cat dinah: i think youd take a fancy to cats if you could only see her.
she is such a dear quiet thing, alice went on, half to herself, as she swam lazily about in the pool, and she sits purring so nicely by the fire, licking her paws and washing her faceand she is such a nice soft thing to nurseand shes such a capital one for catching miceoh, i beg your pardon!
cried alice again, for this time the mouse was bristling all over, and she felt certain it must be really offended.
we wont talk about her any more if youd rather not.
we indeed!
cried the mouse, who was trembling down to the end of his tail.
as if i would talk on such a subject!
our family always hated cats: nasty, low, vulgar things!
dont let me hear the name again!
i wont indeed!
said alice, in a great hurry to change the subject of conversation.
are youare you fondofof dogs?
the mouse did not answer, so alice went on eagerly: there is such a nice little dog near our house i should like to show you!
a little brighteyed terrier, you know, with oh, such long curly brown hair!
and itll fetch things when you throw them, and itll sit up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts of thingsi cant remember half of themand it belongs to a farmer, you know, and he says its so useful, its worth a hundred pounds!
he says it kills all the rats andoh dear!
cried alice in a sorrowful tone, im afraid ive offended it again!
for the mouse was swimming away from her as hard as it could go, and making quite a commotion in the pool as it went.
so she called softly after it, mouse dear!
do come back again, and we wont talk about cats or dogs either, if you dont like them!
when the mouse heard this, it turned round and swam slowly back to her: its face was quite pale (with passion, alice thought), and it said in a low trembling voice, let us get to the shore, and then ill tell you my history, and youll understand why it is i hate cats and dogs.
it was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded with the birds and animals that had fallen into it: there were a duck and a dodo, a lory and an eaglet, and several other curious creatures.
alice led the way, and the whole party swam to the shore.
chapter iii.
a caucusrace and a long tale they were indeed a queerlooking party that assembled on the bankthe birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their fur clinging close to them, and all dripping wet, cross, and uncomfortable.
the first question of course was, how to get dry again: they had a consultation about this, and after a few minutes it seemed quite natural to alice to find herself talking familiarly with them, as if she had known them all her life.
indeed, she had quite a long argument with the lory, who at last turned sulky, and would only say, i am older than you, and must know better; and this alice would not allow without knowing how old it was, and, as the lory positively refused to tell its age, there was no more to be said.
at last the mouse, who seemed to be a person of authority among them, called out, sit down, all of you, and listen to me!
ill soon make you dry enough!
they all sat down at once, in a large ring, with the mouse in the middle.
alice kept her eyes anxiously fixed on it, for she felt sure she would catch a bad cold if she did not get dry very soon.
ahem!
said the mouse with an important air, are you all ready?
this is the driest thing i know.
silence all round, if you please!
william the conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was soon submitted to by the english, who wanted leaders, and had been of late much accustomed to usurpation and conquest.
edwin and morcar, the earls of mercia and northumbria ugh!
said the lory, with a shiver.
i beg your pardon!
said the mouse, frowning, but very politely: did you speak?
not i!
said the lory hastily.
i thought you did, said the mouse.
i proceed.
edwin and morcar, the earls of mercia and northumbria, declared for him: and even stigand, the patriotic archbishop of canterbury, found it advisable found what?
said the duck.
found it, the mouse replied rather crossly: of course you know what it means.
i know what it means well enough, when i find a thing, said the duck: its generally a frog or a worm.
the question is, what did the archbishop find?
the mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on, found it advisable to go with edgar atheling to meet william and offer him the crown.
williams conduct at first was moderate.
but the insolence of his normans how are you getting on now, my dear?
it continued, turning to alice as it spoke.
as wet as ever, said alice in a melancholy tone: it doesnt seem to dry me at all.
in that case, said the dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, i move that the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more energetic remedies speak english!
said the eaglet.
i dont know the meaning of half those long words, and, whats more, i dont believe you do either!
and the eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile: some of the other birds tittered audibly.
what i was going to say, said the dodo in an offended tone, was, that the best thing to get us dry would be a caucusrace.
what is a caucusrace?
said alice; not that she wanted much to know, but the dodo had paused as if it thought that somebody ought to speak, and no one else seemed inclined to say anything.
why, said the dodo, the best way to explain it is to do it.
(and, as you might like to try the thing yourself, some winter day, i will tell you how the dodo managed it.)
first it marked out a racecourse, in a sort of circle, (the exact shape doesnt matter, it said,) and then all the party were placed along the course, here and there.
there was no one, two, three, and away, but they began running when they liked, and left off when they liked, so that it was not easy to know when the race was over.
however, when they had been running half an hour or so, and were quite dry again, the dodo suddenly called out the race is over!
and they all crowded round it, panting, and asking, but who has won?
this question the dodo could not answer without a great deal of thought, and it sat for a long time with one finger pressed upon its forehead (the position in which you usually see shakespeare, in the pictures of him), while the rest waited in silence.
at last the dodo said, everybody has won, and all must have prizes.
but who is to give the prizes?
quite a chorus of voices asked.
why, she, of course, said the dodo, pointing to alice with one finger; and the whole party at once crowded round her, calling out in a confused way, prizes!
prizes!
alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand in her pocket, and pulled out a box of comfits, (luckily the salt water had not got into it), and handed them round as prizes.
there was exactly one apiece, all round.
but she must have a prize herself, you know, said the mouse.
of course, the dodo replied very gravely.
what else have you got in your pocket?
he went on, turning to alice.
only a thimble, said alice sadly.
hand it over here, said the dodo.
then they all crowded round her once more, while the dodo solemnly presented the thimble, saying we beg your acceptance of this elegant thimble; and, when it had finished this short speech, they all cheered.
alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they all looked so grave that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not think of anything to say, she simply bowed, and took the thimble, looking as solemn as she could.
the next thing was to eat the comfits: this caused some noise and confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not taste theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on the back.
however, it was over at last, and they sat down again in a ring, and begged the mouse to tell them something more.
you promised to tell me your history, you know, said alice, and why it is you hatec and d, she added in a whisper, half afraid that it would be offended again.
mine is a long and a sad tale!
said the mouse, turning to alice, and sighing.
it is a long tail, certainly, said alice, looking down with wonder at the mouses tail; but why do you call it sad?
and she kept on puzzling about it while the mouse was speaking, so that her idea of the tale was something like this: fury said to a mouse, that he met in the house, let us both go to law: i will prosecute you.come, ill take no denial; we must have a trial: for really this morning ive nothing to do.
said the mouse to the cur, such a trial, dear sir, with no jury or judge, would be wasting our breath.
ill be judge, ill be jury, said cunning old fury: ill try the whole cause, and condemn you to death.
you are not attending!
said the mouse to alice severely.
what are you thinking of?
i beg your pardon, said alice very humbly: you had got to the fifth bend, i think?
i had not!
cried the mouse, sharply and very angrily.
a knot!
said alice, always ready to make herself useful, and looking anxiously about her.
oh, do let me help to undo it!
i shall do nothing of the sort, said the mouse, getting up and walking away.
you insult me by talking such nonsense!
i didnt mean it!
pleaded poor alice.
but youre so easily offended, you know!
the mouse only growled in reply.
please come back and finish your story!
alice called after it; and the others all joined in chorus, yes, please do!
but the mouse only shook its head impatiently, and walked a little quicker.
what a pity it wouldnt stay!
sighed the lory, as soon as it was quite out of sight; and an old crab took the opportunity of saying to her daughter ah, my dear!
let this be a lesson to you never to lose your temper!
hold your tongue, ma!
said the young crab, a little snappishly.
youre enough to try the patience of an oyster!
i wish i had our dinah here, i know i do!
said alice aloud, addressing nobody in particular.
shed soon fetch it back!
and who is dinah, if i might venture to ask the question?
said the lory.
alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about her pet: dinahs our cat.
and shes such a capital one for catching mice you cant think!
and oh, i wish you could see her after the birds!
why, shell eat a little bird as soon as look at it!
this speech caused a remarkable sensation among the party.
some of the birds hurried off at once: one old magpie began wrapping itself up very carefully, remarking, i really must be getting home; the nightair doesnt suit my throat!
and a canary called out in a trembling voice to its children, come away, my dears!
its high time you were all in bed!
on various pretexts they all moved off, and alice was soon left alone.
i wish i hadnt mentioned dinah!
she said to herself in a melancholy tone.
nobody seems to like her, down here, and im sure shes the best cat in the world!
oh, my dear dinah!
i wonder if i shall ever see you any more!
and here poor alice began to cry again, for she felt very lonely and lowspirited.
in a little while, however, she again heard a little pattering of footsteps in the distance, and she looked up eagerly, half hoping that the mouse had changed his mind, and was coming back to finish his story.
chapter iv.
the rabbit sends in a little bill it was the white rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and looking anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something; and she heard it muttering to itself the duchess!
the duchess!
oh my dear paws!
oh my fur and whiskers!
shell get me executed, as sure as ferrets are ferrets!
where can i have dropped them, i wonder?
alice guessed in a moment that it was looking for the fan and the pair of white kid gloves, and she very goodnaturedly began hunting about for them, but they were nowhere to be seeneverything seemed to have changed since her swim in the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and the little door, had vanished completely.
very soon the rabbit noticed alice, as she went hunting about, and called out to her in an angry tone, why, mary ann, what are you doing out here?
run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of gloves and a fan!
quick, now!
and alice was so much frightened that she ran off at once in the direction it pointed to, without trying to explain the mistake it had made.
he took me for his housemaid, she said to herself as she ran.
how surprised hell be when he finds out who i am!
but id better take him his fan and glovesthat is, if i can find them.
as she said this, she came upon a neat little house, on the door of which was a bright brass plate with the name w. rabbit, engraved upon it.
she went in without knocking, and hurried upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the real mary ann, and be turned out of the house before she had found the fan and gloves.
how queer it seems, alice said to herself, to be going messages for a rabbit!
i suppose dinahll be sending me on messages next!
and she began fancying the sort of thing that would happen: miss alice!
come here directly, and get ready for your walk!
coming in a minute, nurse!
but ive got to see that the mouse doesnt get out.
only i dont think, alice went on, that theyd let dinah stop in the house if it began ordering people about like that!
by this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with a table in the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two or three pairs of tiny white kid gloves: she took up the fan and a pair of the gloves, and was just going to leave the room, when her eye fell upon a little bottle that stood near the lookingglass.
there was no label this time with the words drink me, but nevertheless she uncorked it and put it to her lips.
i know something interesting is sure to happen, she said to herself, whenever i eat or drink anything; so ill just see what this bottle does.
i do hope itll make me grow large again, for really im quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!
it did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected: before she had drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing against the ceiling, and had to stoop to save her neck from being broken.
she hastily put down the bottle, saying to herself thats quite enoughi hope i shant grow any moreas it is, i cant get out at the doori do wish i hadnt drunk quite so much!
alas!
it was too late to wish that!
she went on growing, and growing, and very soon had to kneel down on the floor: in another minute there was not even room for this, and she tried the effect of lying down with one elbow against the door, and the other arm curled round her head.
still she went on growing, and, as a last resource, she put one arm out of the window, and one foot up the chimney, and said to herself now i can do no more, whatever happens.
what will become of me?
luckily for alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full effect, and she grew no larger: still it was very uncomfortable, and, as there seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting out of the room again, no wonder she felt unhappy.
it was much pleasanter at home, thought poor alice, when one wasnt always growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about by mice and rabbits.
i almost wish i hadnt gone down that rabbitholeand yetand yetits rather curious, you know, this sort of life!
i do wonder what can have happened to me!
when i used to read fairytales, i fancied that kind of thing never happened, and now here i am in the middle of one!
there ought to be a book written about me, that there ought!
and when i grow up, ill write onebut im grown up now, she added in a sorrowful tone; at least theres no room to grow up any more here.
but then, thought alice, shall i never get any older than i am now?
thatll be a comfort, one waynever to be an old womanbut thenalways to have lessons to learn!
oh, i shouldnt like that!
oh, you foolish alice!
she answered herself.
how can you learn lessons in here?
why, theres hardly room for you, and no room at all for any lessonbooks!
and so she went on, taking first one side and then the other, and making quite a conversation of it altogether; but after a few minutes she heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen.
mary ann!
mary ann!
said the voice.
fetch me my gloves this moment!
then came a little pattering of feet on the stairs.
alice knew it was the rabbit coming to look for her, and she trembled till she shook the house, quite forgetting that she was now about a thousand times as large as the rabbit, and had no reason to be afraid of it.
presently the rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it; but, as the door opened inwards, and alices elbow was pressed hard against it, that attempt proved a failure.
alice heard it say to itself then ill go round and get in at the window.
that you wont!
thought alice, and, after waiting till she fancied she heard the rabbit just under the window, she suddenly spread out her hand, and made a snatch in the air.
she did not get hold of anything, but she heard a little shriek and a fall, and a crash of broken glass, from which she concluded that it was just possible it had fallen into a cucumberframe, or something of the sort.
next came an angry voicethe rabbitspat!
pat!
where are you?
and then a voice she had never heard before, sure then im here!
digging for apples, yer honour!
digging for apples, indeed!
said the rabbit angrily.
here!
come and help me out of this!
(sounds of more broken glass.)
now tell me, pat, whats that in the window?
sure, its an arm, yer honour!
(he pronounced it arrum.)
an arm, you goose!
who ever saw one that size?
why, it fills the whole window!
sure, it does, yer honour: but its an arm for all that.
well, its got no business there, at any rate: go and take it away!
there was a long silence after this, and alice could only hear whispers now and then; such as, sure, i dont like it, yer honour, at all, at all!
do as i tell you, you coward!
and at last she spread out her hand again, and made another snatch in the air.
this time there were two little shrieks, and more sounds of broken glass.
what a number of cucumberframes there must be!
thought alice.
i wonder what theyll do next!
as for pulling me out of the window, i only wish they could!
im sure i dont want to stay in here any longer!
she waited for some time without hearing anything more: at last came a rumbling of little cartwheels, and the sound of a good many voices all talking together: she made out the words: wheres the other ladder?why, i hadnt to bring but one; bills got the otherbill!
fetch it here, lad!here, put em up at this cornerno, tie em together firstthey dont reach half high enough yetoh!
theyll do well enough; dont be particularhere, bill!
catch hold of this ropewill the roof bear?mind that loose slateoh, its coming down!
heads below!
(a loud crash)now, who did that?it was bill, i fancywhos to go down the chimney?nay, i shant!
you do it!that i wont, then!bills to go downhere, bill!
the master says youre to go down the chimney!
oh!
so bills got to come down the chimney, has he?
said alice to herself.
shy, they seem to put everything upon bill!
i wouldnt be in bills place for a good deal: this fireplace is narrow, to be sure; but i think i can kick a little!
she drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and waited till she heard a little animal (she couldnt guess of what sort it was) scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close above her: then, saying to herself this is bill, she gave one sharp kick, and waited to see what would happen next.
the first thing she heard was a general chorus of there goes bill!
then the rabbits voice alongcatch him, you by the hedge!
then silence, and then another confusion of voiceshold up his headbrandy nowdont choke himhow was it, old fellow?
what happened to you?
tell us all about it!
last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, (thats bill, thought alice,) well, i hardly knowno more, thank ye; im better nowbut im a deal too flustered to tell youall i know is, something comes at me like a jackinthebox, and up i goes like a skyrocket!
so you did, old fellow!
said the others.
we must burn the house down!
said the rabbits voice; and alice called out as loud as she could, if you do, ill set dinah at you!
there was a dead silence instantly, and alice thought to herself, i wonder what they will do next!
if they had any sense, theyd take the roof off.
after a minute or two, they began moving about again, and alice heard the rabbit say, a barrowful will do, to begin with.
a barrowful of what?
thought alice; but she had not long to doubt, for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came rattling in at the window, and some of them hit her in the face.
ill put a stop to this, she said to herself, and shouted out, youd better not do that again!
which produced another dead silence.
alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all turning into little cakes as they lay on the floor, and a bright idea came into her head.
if i eat one of these cakes, she thought, its sure to make some change in my size; and as it cant possibly make me larger, it must make me smaller, i suppose.
so she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find that she began shrinking directly.
as soon as she was small enough to get through the door, she ran out of the house, and found quite a crowd of little animals and birds waiting outside.
the poor little lizard, bill, was in the middle, being held up by two guineapigs, who were giving it something out of a bottle.
they all made a rush at alice the moment she appeared; but she ran off as hard as she could, and soon found herself safe in a thick wood.
the first thing ive got to do, said alice to herself, as she wandered about in the wood, is to grow to my right size again; and the second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden.
i think that will be the best plan.
it sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and simply arranged; the only difficulty was, that she had not the smallest idea how to set about it; and while she was peering about anxiously among the trees, a little sharp bark just over her head made her look up in a great hurry.
an enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round eyes, and feebly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her.
poor little thing!
said alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried hard to whistle to it; but she was terribly frightened all the time at the thought that it might be hungry, in which case it would be very likely to eat her up in spite of all her coaxing.
hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a little bit of stick, and held it out to the puppy; whereupon the puppy jumped into the air off all its feet at once, with a yelp of delight, and rushed at the stick, and made believe to worry it; then alice dodged behind a great thistle, to keep herself from being run over; and the moment she appeared on the other side, the puppy made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head over heels in its hurry to get hold of it; then alice, thinking it was very like having a game of play with a carthorse, and expecting every moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round the thistle again; then the puppy began a series of short charges at the stick, running a very little way forwards each time and a long way back, and barking hoarsely all the while, till at last it sat down a good way off, panting, with its tongue hanging out of its mouth, and its great eyes half shut.
this seemed to alice a good opportunity for making her escape; so she set off at once, and ran till she was quite tired and out of breath, and till the puppys bark sounded quite faint in the distance.
and yet what a dear little puppy it was!
said alice, as she leant against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself with one of the leaves: i should have liked teaching it tricks very much, ifif id only been the right size to do it!
oh dear!
id nearly forgotten that ive got to grow up again!
let me seehow is it to be managed?
i suppose i ought to eat or drink something or other; but the great question is, what?
the great question certainly was, what?
alice looked all round her at the flowers and the blades of grass, but she did not see anything that looked like the right thing to eat or drink under the circumstances.
there was a large mushroom growing near her, about the same height as herself; and when she had looked under it, and on both sides of it, and behind it, it occurred to her that she might as well look and see what was on the top of it.
she stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of the mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large blue caterpillar, that was sitting on the top with its arms folded, quietly smoking a long hookah, and taking not the smallest notice of her or of anything else.
chapter v. advice from a caterpillar the caterpillar and alice looked at each other for some time in silence: at last the caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.
who are you?
said the caterpillar.
this was not an encouraging opening for a conversation.
alice replied, rather shyly, ii hardly know, sir, just at presentat least i know who i was when i got up this morning, but i think i must have been changed several times since then.
what do you mean by that?
said the caterpillar sternly.
explain yourself!
i cant explain myself, im afraid, sir, said alice, because im not myself, you see.
i dont see, said the caterpillar.
im afraid i cant put it more clearly, alice replied very politely, for i cant understand it myself to begin with; and being so many different sizes in a day is very confusing.
it isnt, said the caterpillar.
well, perhaps you havent found it so yet, said alice; but when you have to turn into a chrysalisyou will some day, you knowand then after that into a butterfly, i should think youll feel it a little queer, wont you?
not a bit, said the caterpillar.
well, perhaps your feelings may be different, said alice; all i know is, it would feel very queer to me.
you!
said the caterpillar contemptuously.
who are you?
which brought them back again to the beginning of the conversation.
alice felt a little irritated at the caterpillars making such very short remarks, and she drew herself up and said, very gravely, i think, you ought to tell me who you are, first.
why?
said the caterpillar.
here was another puzzling question; and as alice could not think of any good reason, and as the caterpillar seemed to be in a very unpleasant state of mind, she turned away.
come back!
the caterpillar called after her.
ive something important to say!
this sounded promising, certainly: alice turned and came back again.
keep your temper, said the caterpillar.
is that all?
said alice, swallowing down her anger as well as she could.
no, said the caterpillar.
alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else to do, and perhaps after all it might tell her something worth hearing.
for some minutes it puffed away without speaking, but at last it unfolded its arms, took the hookah out of its mouth again, and said, so you think youre changed, do you?
im afraid i am, sir, said alice; i cant remember things as i usedand i dont keep the same size for ten minutes together!
cant remember what things?
said the caterpillar.
well, ive tried to say how doth the little busy bee, but it all came different!
alice replied in a very melancholy voice.
repeat, you are old, father william, said the caterpillar.
alice folded her hands, and began: you are old, father william, the young man said, and your hair has become very white; and yet you incessantly stand on your head do you think, at your age, it is right?
in my youth, father william replied to his son, i feared it might injure the brain; but, now that im perfectly sure i have none, why, i do it again and again.
you are old, said the youth, as i mentioned before, and have grown most uncommonly fat; yet you turned a backsomersault in at the door pray, what is the reason of that?
in my youth, said the sage, as he shook his grey locks, i kept all my limbs very supple by the use of this ointmentone shilling the box allow me to sell you a couple?
you are old, said the youth, and your jaws are too weak for anything tougher than suet; yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak pray, how did you manage to do it?
in my youth, said his father, i took to the law, and argued each case with my wife; and the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw, has lasted the rest of my life.
you are old, said the youth, one would hardly suppose that your eye was as steady as ever; yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose what made you so awfully clever?
i have answered three questions, and that is enough, said his father; dont give yourself airs!
do you think i can listen all day to such stuff?
be off, or ill kick you down stairs!
that is not said right, said the caterpillar.
not quite right, im afraid, said alice, timidly; some of the words have got altered.
it is wrong from beginning to end, said the caterpillar decidedly, and there was silence for some minutes.
the caterpillar was the first to speak.
what size do you want to be?
it asked.
oh, im not particular as to size, alice hastily replied; only one doesnt like changing so often, you know.
i dont know, said the caterpillar.
alice said nothing: she had never been so much contradicted in her life before, and she felt that she was losing her temper.
are you content now?
said the caterpillar.
well, i should like to be a little larger, sir, if you wouldnt mind, said alice: three inches is such a wretched height to be.
it is a very good height indeed!
said the caterpillar angrily, rearing itself upright as it spoke (it was exactly three inches high).
but im not used to it!
pleaded poor alice in a piteous tone.
and she thought of herself, i wish the creatures wouldnt be so easily offended!
youll get used to it in time, said the caterpillar; and it put the hookah into its mouth and began smoking again.
this time alice waited patiently until it chose to speak again.
in a minute or two the caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth and yawned once or twice, and shook itself.
then it got down off the mushroom, and crawled away in the grass, merely remarking as it went, one side will make you grow taller, and the other side will make you grow shorter.
one side of what?
the other side of what?
thought alice to herself.
of the mushroom, said the caterpillar, just as if she had asked it aloud; and in another moment it was out of sight.
alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a minute, trying to make out which were the two sides of it; and as it was perfectly round, she found this a very difficult question.
however, at last she stretched her arms round it as far as they would go, and broke off a bit of the edge with each hand.
and now which is which?
she said to herself, and nibbled a little of the righthand bit to try the effect: the next moment she felt a violent blow underneath her chin: it had struck her foot!
she was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but she felt that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking rapidly; so she set to work at once to eat some of the other bit.
her chin was pressed so closely against her foot, that there was hardly room to open her mouth; but she did it at last, and managed to swallow a morsel of the lefthand bit.
come, my heads free at last!
said alice in a tone of delight, which changed into alarm in another moment, when she found that her shoulders were nowhere to be found: all she could see, when she looked down, was an immense length of neck, which seemed to rise like a stalk out of a sea of green leaves that lay far below her.
what can all that green stuff be?
said alice.
and where have my shoulders got to?
and oh, my poor hands, how is it i cant see you?
she was moving them about as she spoke, but no result seemed to follow, except a little shaking among the distant green leaves.
as there seemed to be no chance of getting her hands up to her head, she tried to get her head down to them, and was delighted to find that her neck would bend about easily in any direction, like a serpent.
she had just succeeded in curving it down into a graceful zigzag, and was going to dive in among the leaves, which she found to be nothing but the tops of the trees under which she had been wandering, when a sharp hiss made her draw back in a hurry: a large pigeon had flown into her face, and was beating her violently with its wings.
serpent!
screamed the pigeon.
im not a serpent!
said alice indignantly.
let me alone!
serpent, i say again!
repeated the pigeon, but in a more subdued tone, and added with a kind of sob, ive tried every way, and nothing seems to suit them!
i havent the least idea what youre talking about, said alice.
ive tried the roots of trees, and ive tried banks, and ive tried hedges, the pigeon went on, without attending to her; but those serpents!
theres no pleasing them!
alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no use in saying anything more till the pigeon had finished.
as if it wasnt trouble enough hatching the eggs, said the pigeon; but i must be on the lookout for serpents night and day!
why, i havent had a wink of sleep these three weeks!
im very sorry youve been annoyed, said alice, who was beginning to see its meaning.
and just as id taken the highest tree in the wood, continued the pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, and just as i was thinking i should be free of them at last, they must needs come wriggling down from the sky!
ugh, serpent!
but im not a serpent, i tell you!
said alice.
im aim a well!
what are you?
said the pigeon.
i can see youre trying to invent something!
iim a little girl, said alice, rather doubtfully, as she remembered the number of changes she had gone through that day.
a likely story indeed!
said the pigeon in a tone of the deepest contempt.
ive seen a good many little girls in my time, but never one with such a neck as that!
no, no!
youre a serpent; and theres no use denying it.
i suppose youll be telling me next that you never tasted an egg!
i have tasted eggs, certainly, said alice, who was a very truthful child; but little girls eat eggs quite as much as serpents do, you know.
i dont believe it, said the pigeon; but if they do, why then theyre a kind of serpent, thats all i can say.
this was such a new idea to alice, that she was quite silent for a minute or two, which gave the pigeon the opportunity of adding, youre looking for eggs, i know that well enough; and what does it matter to me whether youre a little girl or a serpent?
it matters a good deal to me, said alice hastily; but im not looking for eggs, as it happens; and if i was, i shouldnt want yours: i dont like them raw.
well, be off, then!
said the pigeon in a sulky tone, as it settled down again into its nest.
alice crouched down among the trees as well as she could, for her neck kept getting entangled among the branches, and every now and then she had to stop and untwist it.
after a while she remembered that she still held the pieces of mushroom in her hands, and she set to work very carefully, nibbling first at one and then at the other, and growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until she had succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height.
it was so long since she had been anything near the right size, that it felt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a few minutes, and began talking to herself, as usual.
come, theres half my plan done now!
how puzzling all these changes are!
im never sure what im going to be, from one minute to another!
however, ive got back to my right size: the next thing is, to get into that beautiful gardenhow is that to be done, i wonder?
as she said this, she came suddenly upon an open place, with a little house in it about four feet high.
whoever lives there, thought alice, itll never do to come upon them this size: why, i should frighten them out of their wits!
so she began nibbling at the righthand bit again, and did not venture to go near the house till she had brought herself down to nine inches high.
chapter vi.
pig and pepper for a minute or two she stood looking at the house, and wondering what to do next, when suddenly a footman in livery came running out of the wood(she considered him to be a footman because he was in livery: otherwise, judging by his face only, she would have called him a fish)and rapped loudly at the door with his knuckles.
it was opened by another footman in livery, with a round face, and large eyes like a frog; and both footmen, alice noticed, had powdered hair that curled all over their heads.
she felt very curious to know what it was all about, and crept a little way out of the wood to listen.
the fishfootman began by producing from under his arm a great letter, nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to the other, saying, in a solemn tone, for the duchess.
an invitation from the queen to play croquet.
the frogfootman repeated, in the same solemn tone, only changing the order of the words a little, from the queen.
an invitation for the duchess to play croquet.
then they both bowed low, and their curls got entangled together.
alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into the wood for fear of their hearing her; and when she next peeped out the fishfootman was gone, and the other was sitting on the ground near the door, staring stupidly up into the sky.
alice went timidly up to the door, and knocked.
theres no sort of use in knocking, said the footman, and that for two reasons.
first, because im on the same side of the door as you are; secondly, because theyre making such a noise inside, no one could possibly hear you.
and certainly there was a most extraordinary noise going on withina constant howling and sneezing, and every now and then a great crash, as if a dish or kettle had been broken to pieces.
please, then, said alice, how am i to get in?
there might be some sense in your knocking, the footman went on without attending to her, if we had the door between us.
for instance, if you were inside, you might knock, and i could let you out, you know.
he was looking up into the sky all the time he was speaking, and this alice thought decidedly uncivil.
but perhaps he cant help it, she said to herself; his eyes are so very nearly at the top of his head.
but at any rate he might answer questions.how am i to get in?
she repeated, aloud.
i shall sit here, the footman remarked, till tomorrow at this moment the door of the house opened, and a large plate came skimming out, straight at the footmans head: it just grazed his nose, and broke to pieces against one of the trees behind him.
or next day, maybe, the footman continued in the same tone, exactly as if nothing had happened.
how am i to get in?
asked alice again, in a louder tone.
are you to get in at all?
said the footman.
thats the first question, you know.
it was, no doubt: only alice did not like to be told so.
its really dreadful, she muttered to herself, the way all the creatures argue.
its enough to drive one crazy!
the footman seemed to think this a good opportunity for repeating his remark, with variations.
i shall sit here, he said, on and off, for days and days.
but what am i to do?
said alice.
anything you like, said the footman, and began whistling.
oh, theres no use in talking to him, said alice desperately: hes perfectly idiotic!
and she opened the door and went in.
the door led right into a large kitchen, which was full of smoke from one end to the other: the duchess was sitting on a threelegged stool in the middle, nursing a baby; the cook was leaning over the fire, stirring a large cauldron which seemed to be full of soup.
theres certainly too much pepper in that soup!
alice said to herself, as well as she could for sneezing.
there was certainly too much of it in the air.
even the duchess sneezed occasionally; and as for the baby, it was sneezing and howling alternately without a moments pause.
the only things in the kitchen that did not sneeze, were the cook, and a large cat which was sitting on the hearth and grinning from ear to ear.
please would you tell me, said alice, a little timidly, for she was not quite sure whether it was good manners for her to speak first, why your cat grins like that?
its a cheshire cat, said the duchess, and thats why.
pig!
she said the last word with such sudden violence that alice quite jumped; but she saw in another moment that it was addressed to the baby, and not to her, so she took courage, and went on again: i didnt know that cheshire cats always grinned; in fact, i didnt know that cats could grin.
they all can, said the duchess; and most of em do.
i dont know of any that do, alice said very politely, feeling quite pleased to have got into a conversation.
you dont know much, said the duchess; and thats a fact.
alice did not at all like the tone of this remark, and thought it would be as well to introduce some other subject of conversation.
while she was trying to fix on one, the cook took the cauldron of soup off the fire, and at once set to work throwing everything within her reach at the duchess and the babythe fireirons came first; then followed a shower of saucepans, plates, and dishes.
the duchess took no notice of them even when they hit her; and the baby was howling so much already, that it was quite impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.
oh, please mind what youre doing!
cried alice, jumping up and down in an agony of terror.
oh, there goes his precious nose!
as an unusually large saucepan flew close by it, and very nearly carried it off.
if everybody minded their own business, the duchess said in a hoarse growl, the world would go round a deal faster than it does.
which would not be an advantage, said alice, who felt very glad to get an opportunity of showing off a little of her knowledge.
just think of what work it would make with the day and night!
you see the earth takes twentyfour hours to turn round on its axis talking of axes, said the duchess, chop off her head!
alice glanced rather anxiously at the cook, to see if she meant to take the hint; but the cook was busily stirring the soup, and seemed not to be listening, so she went on again: twentyfour hours, i think; or is it twelve?
i oh, dont bother me, said the duchess; i never could abide figures!
and with that she began nursing her child again, singing a sort of lullaby to it as she did so, and giving it a violent shake at the end of every line: speak roughly to your little boy, and beat him when he sneezes: he only does it to annoy, because he knows it teases.
chorus.
(in which the cook and the baby joined): wow!
wow!
wow!
while the duchess sang the second verse of the song, she kept tossing the baby violently up and down, and the poor little thing howled so, that alice could hardly hear the words: i speak severely to my boy, i beat him when he sneezes; for he can thoroughly enjoy the pepper when he pleases!
chorus.
wow!
wow!
wow!
here!
you may nurse it a bit, if you like!
the duchess said to alice, flinging the baby at her as she spoke.
i must go and get ready to play croquet with the queen, and she hurried out of the room.
the cook threw a fryingpan after her as she went out, but it just missed her.
alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queershaped little creature, and held out its arms and legs in all directions, just like a starfish, thought alice.
the poor little thing was snorting like a steamengine when she caught it, and kept doubling itself up and straightening itself out again, so that altogether, for the first minute or two, it was as much as she could do to hold it.
as soon as she had made out the proper way of nursing it, (which was to twist it up into a sort of knot, and then keep tight hold of its right ear and left foot, so as to prevent its undoing itself,) she carried it out into the open air.
if i dont take this child away with me, thought alice, theyre sure to kill it in a day or two: wouldnt it be murder to leave it behind?
she said the last words out loud, and the little thing grunted in reply (it had left off sneezing by this time).
dont grunt, said alice; thats not at all a proper way of expressing yourself.
the baby grunted again, and alice looked very anxiously into its face to see what was the matter with it.
there could be no doubt that it had a very turnup nose, much more like a snout than a real nose; also its eyes were getting extremely small for a baby: altogether alice did not like the look of the thing at all.
but perhaps it was only sobbing, she thought, and looked into its eyes again, to see if there were any tears.
no, there were no tears.
if youre going to turn into a pig, my dear, said alice, seriously, ill have nothing more to do with you.
mind now!
the poor little thing sobbed again (or grunted, it was impossible to say which), and they went on for some while in silence.
alice was just beginning to think to herself, now, what am i to do with this creature when i get it home?
when it grunted again, so violently, that she looked down into its face in some alarm.
this time there could be no mistake about it: it was neither more nor less than a pig, and she felt that it would be quite absurd for her to carry it further.
so she set the little creature down, and felt quite relieved to see it trot away quietly into the wood.
if it had grown up, she said to herself, it would have made a dreadfully ugly child: but it makes rather a handsome pig, i think.
and she began thinking over other children she knew, who might do very well as pigs, and was just saying to herself, if one only knew the right way to change them when she was a little startled by seeing the cheshire cat sitting on a bough of a tree a few yards off.
the cat only grinned when it saw alice.
it looked goodnatured, she thought: still it had very long claws and a great many teeth, so she felt that it ought to be treated with respect.
cheshire puss, she began, rather timidly, as she did not at all know whether it would like the name: however, it only grinned a little wider.
come, its pleased so far, thought alice, and she went on.
would you tell me, please, which way i ought to go from here?
that depends a good deal on where you want to get to, said the cat.
i dont much care where said alice.
then it doesnt matter which way you go, said the cat.
so long as i get somewhere, alice added as an explanation.
oh, youre sure to do that, said the cat, if you only walk long enough.
alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another question.
what sort of people live about here?
in that direction, the cat said, waving its right paw round, lives a hatter: and in that direction, waving the other paw, lives a march hare.
visit either you like: theyre both mad.
but i dont want to go among mad people, alice remarked.
oh, you cant help that, said the cat: were all mad here.
im mad.
youre mad.
how do you know im mad?
said alice.
you must be, said the cat, or you wouldnt have come here.
alice didnt think that proved it at all; however, she went on and how do you know that youre mad?
to begin with, said the cat, a dogs not mad.
you grant that?
i suppose so, said alice.
well, then, the cat went on, you see, a dog growls when its angry, and wags its tail when its pleased.
now i growl when im pleased, and wag my tail when im angry.
therefore im mad.
i call it purring, not growling, said alice.
call it what you like, said the cat.
do you play croquet with the queen today?
i should like it very much, said alice, but i havent been invited yet.
youll see me there, said the cat, and vanished.
alice was not much surprised at this, she was getting so used to queer things happening.
while she was looking at the place where it had been, it suddenly appeared again.
bythebye, what became of the baby?
said the cat.
id nearly forgotten to ask.
it turned into a pig, alice quietly said, just as if it had come back in a natural way.
i thought it would, said the cat, and vanished again.
alice waited a little, half expecting to see it again, but it did not appear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the direction in which the march hare was said to live.
ive seen hatters before, she said to herself; the march hare will be much the most interesting, and perhaps as this is may it wont be raving madat least not so mad as it was in march.
as she said this, she looked up, and there was the cat again, sitting on a branch of a tree.
did you say pig, or fig?
said the cat.
i said pig, replied alice; and i wish you wouldnt keep appearing and vanishing so suddenly: you make one quite giddy.
all right, said the cat; and this time it vanished quite slowly, beginning with the end of the tail, and ending with the grin, which remained some time after the rest of it had gone.
well!
ive often seen a cat without a grin, thought alice; but a grin without a cat!
its the most curious thing i ever saw in my life!
she had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the house of the march hare: she thought it must be the right house, because the chimneys were shaped like ears and the roof was thatched with fur.
it was so large a house, that she did not like to go nearer till she had nibbled some more of the lefthand bit of mushroom, and raised herself to about two feet high: even then she walked up towards it rather timidly, saying to herself suppose it should be raving mad after all!
i almost wish id gone to see the hatter instead!
chapter vii.
a mad teaparty there was a table set out under a tree in front of the house, and the march hare and the hatter were having tea at it: a dormouse was sitting between them, fast asleep, and the other two were using it as a cushion, resting their elbows on it, and talking over its head.
very uncomfortable for the dormouse, thought alice; only, as its asleep, i suppose it doesnt mind.
the table was a large one, but the three were all crowded together at one corner of it: no room!
no room!
they cried out when they saw alice coming.
theres plenty of room!
said alice indignantly, and she sat down in a large armchair at one end of the table.
have some wine, the march hare said in an encouraging tone.
alice looked all round the table, but there was nothing on it but tea.
i dont see any wine, she remarked.
there isnt any, said the march hare.
then it wasnt very civil of you to offer it, said alice angrily.
it wasnt very civil of you to sit down without being invited, said the march hare.
i didnt know it was your table, said alice; its laid for a great many more than three.
your hair wants cutting, said the hatter.
he had been looking at alice for some time with great curiosity, and this was his first speech.
you should learn not to make personal remarks, alice said with some severity; its very rude.
the hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but all he said was, why is a raven like a writingdesk?
come, we shall have some fun now!
thought alice.
im glad theyve begun asking riddles.i believe i can guess that, she added aloud.
do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?
said the march hare.
exactly so, said alice.
then you should say what you mean, the march hare went on.
i do, alice hastily replied; at leastat least i mean what i saythats the same thing, you know.
not the same thing a bit!
said the hatter.
you might just as well say that i see what i eat is the same thing as i eat what i see!
you might just as well say, added the march hare, that i like what i get is the same thing as i get what i like!
you might just as well say, added the dormouse, who seemed to be talking in his sleep, that i breathe when i sleep is the same thing as i sleep when i breathe!
it is the same thing with you, said the hatter, and here the conversation dropped, and the party sat silent for a minute, while alice thought over all she could remember about ravens and writingdesks, which wasnt much.
the hatter was the first to break the silence.
what day of the month is it?
he said, turning to alice: he had taken his watch out of his pocket, and was looking at it uneasily, shaking it every now and then, and holding it to his ear.
alice considered a little, and then said the fourth.
two days wrong!
sighed the hatter.
i told you butter wouldnt suit the works!
he added looking angrily at the march hare.
it was the best butter, the march hare meekly replied.
yes, but some crumbs must have got in as well, the hatter grumbled: you shouldnt have put it in with the breadknife.
the march hare took the watch and looked at it gloomily: then he dipped it into his cup of tea, and looked at it again: but he could think of nothing better to say than his first remark, it was the best butter, you know.
alice had been looking over his shoulder with some curiosity.
what a funny watch!
she remarked.
it tells the day of the month, and doesnt tell what oclock it is!
why should it?
muttered the hatter.
does your watch tell you what year it is?
of course not, alice replied very readily: but thats because it stays the same year for such a long time together.
which is just the case with mine, said the hatter.
alice felt dreadfully puzzled, the hatters remark seemed to have no sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly english.
i dont quite understand you, she said, as politely as she could.
the dormouse is asleep again, said the hatter, and he poured a little hot tea upon its nose.
the dormouse shook its head impatiently, and said, without opening its eyes, of course, of course; just what i was going to remark myself.
have you guessed the riddle yet?
the hatter said, turning to alice again.
no, i give it up, alice replied: whats the answer?
i havent the slightest idea, said the hatter.
nor i, said the march hare.
alice sighed wearily.
i think you might do something better with the time, she said, than waste it in asking riddles that have no answers.
if you knew time as well as i do, said the hatter, you wouldnt talk about wasting it.
its him.
i dont know what you mean, said alice.
of course you dont!
the hatter said, tossing his head contemptuously.
i dare say you never even spoke to time!
perhaps not, alice cautiously replied: but i know i have to beat time when i learn music.
ah!
that accounts for it, said the hatter.
he wont stand beating.
now, if you only kept on good terms with him, hed do almost anything you liked with the clock.
for instance, suppose it were nine oclock in the morning, just time to begin lessons: youd only have to whisper a hint to time, and round goes the clock in a twinkling!
halfpast one, time for dinner!
(i only wish it was, the march hare said to itself in a whisper.)
that would be grand, certainly, said alice thoughtfully: but theni shouldnt be hungry for it, you know.
not at first, perhaps, said the hatter: but you could keep it to halfpast one as long as you liked.
is that the way you manage?
alice asked.
the hatter shook his head mournfully.
not i!
he replied.
we quarrelled last marchjust before he went mad, you know (pointing with his tea spoon at the march hare,) it was at the great concert given by the queen of hearts, and i had to sing twinkle, twinkle, little bat!
how i wonder what youre at!
you know the song, perhaps?
ive heard something like it, said alice.
it goes on, you know, the hatter continued, in this way: up above the world you fly, like a teatray in the sky.
twinkle, twinkle here the dormouse shook itself, and began singing in its sleep twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, twinkle and went on so long that they had to pinch it to make it stop.
well, id hardly finished the first verse, said the hatter, when the queen jumped up and bawled out, hes murdering the time!
off with his head!
how dreadfully savage!
exclaimed alice.
and ever since that, the hatter went on in a mournful tone, he wont do a thing i ask!
its always six oclock now.
a bright idea came into alices head.
is that the reason so many teathings are put out here?
she asked.
yes, thats it, said the hatter with a sigh: its always teatime, and weve no time to wash the things between whiles.
then you keep moving round, i suppose?
said alice.
exactly so, said the hatter: as the things get used up.
but what happens when you come to the beginning again?
alice ventured to ask.
suppose we change the subject, the march hare interrupted, yawning.
im getting tired of this.
i vote the young lady tells us a story.
im afraid i dont know one, said alice, rather alarmed at the proposal.
then the dormouse shall!
they both cried.
wake up, dormouse!
and they pinched it on both sides at once.
the dormouse slowly opened his eyes.
i wasnt asleep, he said in a hoarse, feeble voice: i heard every word you fellows were saying.
tell us a story!
said the march hare.
yes, please do!
pleaded alice.
and be quick about it, added the hatter, or youll be asleep again before its done.
once upon a time there were three little sisters, the dormouse began in a great hurry; and their names were elsie, lacie, and tillie; and they lived at the bottom of a well what did they live on?
said alice, who always took a great interest in questions of eating and drinking.
they lived on treacle, said the dormouse, after thinking a minute or two.
they couldnt have done that, you know, alice gently remarked; theyd have been ill. so they were, said the dormouse; very ill. alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary way of living would be like, but it puzzled her too much, so she went on: but why did they live at the bottom of a well?
take some more tea, the march hare said to alice, very earnestly.
ive had nothing yet, alice replied in an offended tone, so i cant take more.
you mean you cant take less, said the hatter: its very easy to take more than nothing.
nobody asked your opinion, said alice.
whos making personal remarks now?
the hatter asked triumphantly.
alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped herself to some tea and breadandbutter, and then turned to the dormouse, and repeated her question.
why did they live at the bottom of a well?
the dormouse again took a minute or two to think about it, and then said, it was a treaclewell.
theres no such thing!
alice was beginning very angrily, but the hatter and the march hare went sh!
sh!
and the dormouse sulkily remarked, if you cant be civil, youd better finish the story for yourself.
no, please go on!
alice said very humbly; i wont interrupt again.
i dare say there may be one.
one, indeed!
said the dormouse indignantly.
however, he consented to go on.
and so these three little sistersthey were learning to draw, you know what did they draw?
said alice, quite forgetting her promise.
treacle, said the dormouse, without considering at all this time.
i want a clean cup, interrupted the hatter: lets all move one place on.
he moved on as he spoke, and the dormouse followed him: the march hare moved into the dormouses place, and alice rather unwillingly took the place of the march hare.
the hatter was the only one who got any advantage from the change: and alice was a good deal worse off than before, as the march hare had just upset the milkjug into his plate.
alice did not wish to offend the dormouse again, so she began very cautiously: but i dont understand.
where did they draw the treacle from?
you can draw water out of a waterwell, said the hatter; so i should think you could draw treacle out of a treaclewelleh, stupid?
but they were in the well, alice said to the dormouse, not choosing to notice this last remark.
of course they were, said the dormouse; well in.
this answer so confused poor alice, that she let the dormouse go on for some time without interrupting it.
they were learning to draw, the dormouse went on, yawning and rubbing its eyes, for it was getting very sleepy; and they drew all manner of thingseverything that begins with an m why with an m?
said alice.
why not?
said the march hare.
alice was silent.
the dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going off into a doze; but, on being pinched by the hatter, it woke up again with a little shriek, and went on: that begins with an m, such as mousetraps, and the moon, and memory, and muchnessyou know you say things are much of a muchnessdid you ever see such a thing as a drawing of a muchness?
really, now you ask me, said alice, very much confused, i dont think then you shouldnt talk, said the hatter.
this piece of rudeness was more than alice could bear: she got up in great disgust, and walked off; the dormouse fell asleep instantly, and neither of the others took the least notice of her going, though she looked back once or twice, half hoping that they would call after her: the last time she saw them, they were trying to put the dormouse into the teapot.
at any rate ill never go there again!
said alice as she picked her way through the wood.
its the stupidest teaparty i ever was at in all my life!
just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a door leading right into it.
thats very curious!
she thought.
but everythings curious today.
i think i may as well go in at once.
and in she went.
once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the little glass table.
now, ill manage better this time, she said to herself, and began by taking the little golden key, and unlocking the door that led into the garden.
then she went to work nibbling at the mushroom (she had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she was about a foot high: then she walked down the little passage: and thenshe found herself at last in the beautiful garden, among the bright flowerbeds and the cool fountains.
chapter viii.
the queens croquetground a large rosetree stood near the entrance of the garden: the roses growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at it, busily painting them red.
alice thought this a very curious thing, and she went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up to them she heard one of them say, look out now, five!
dont go splashing paint over me like that!
i couldnt help it, said five, in a sulky tone; seven jogged my elbow.
on which seven looked up and said, thats right, five!
always lay the blame on others!
youd better not talk!
said five.
i heard the queen say only yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!
what for?
said the one who had spoken first.
thats none of your business, two!
said seven.
yes, it is his business!
said five, and ill tell himit was for bringing the cook tuliproots instead of onions.
seven flung down his brush, and had just begun well, of all the unjust things when his eye chanced to fall upon alice, as she stood watching them, and he checked himself suddenly: the others looked round also, and all of them bowed low.
would you tell me, said alice, a little timidly, why you are painting those roses?
five and seven said nothing, but looked at two.
two began in a low voice, why the fact is, you see, miss, this here ought to have been a red rosetree, and we put a white one in by mistake; and if the queen was to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know.
so you see, miss, were doing our best, afore she comes, to at this moment five, who had been anxiously looking across the garden, called out the queen!
the queen!
and the three gardeners instantly threw themselves flat upon their faces.
there was a sound of many footsteps, and alice looked round, eager to see the queen.
first came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these were all shaped like the three gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and feet at the corners: next the ten courtiers; these were ornamented all over with diamonds, and walked two and two, as the soldiers did.
after these came the royal children; there were ten of them, and the little dears came jumping merrily along hand in hand, in couples: they were all ornamented with hearts.
next came the guests, mostly kings and queens, and among them alice recognised the white rabbit: it was talking in a hurried nervous manner, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without noticing her.
then followed the knave of hearts, carrying the kings crown on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of all this grand procession, came the king and queen of hearts.
alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on her face like the three gardeners, but she could not remember ever having heard of such a rule at processions; and besides, what would be the use of a procession, thought she, if people had all to lie down upon their faces, so that they couldnt see it?
so she stood still where she was, and waited.
when the procession came opposite to alice, they all stopped and looked at her, and the queen said severely who is this?
she said it to the knave of hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.
idiot!
said the queen, tossing her head impatiently; and, turning to alice, she went on, whats your name, child?
my name is alice, so please your majesty, said alice very politely; but she added, to herself, why, theyre only a pack of cards, after all.
i neednt be afraid of them!
and who are these?
said the queen, pointing to the three gardeners who were lying round the rosetree; for, you see, as they were lying on their faces, and the pattern on their backs was the same as the rest of the pack, she could not tell whether they were gardeners, or soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her own children.
how should i know?
said alice, surprised at her own courage.
its no business of mine.
the queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her for a moment like a wild beast, screamed off with her head!
off nonsense!
said alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the queen was silent.
the king laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said consider, my dear: she is only a child!
the queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the knave turn them over!
the knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.
get up!
said the queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the three gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the king, the queen, the royal children, and everybody else.
leave off that!
screamed the queen.
you make me giddy.
and then, turning to the rosetree, she went on, what have you been doing here?
may it please your majesty, said two, in a very humble tone, going down on one knee as he spoke, we were trying i see!
said the queen, who had meanwhile been examining the roses.
off with their heads!
and the procession moved on, three of the soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate gardeners, who ran to alice for protection.
you shant be beheaded!
said alice, and she put them into a large flowerpot that stood near.
the three soldiers wandered about for a minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly marched off after the others.
are their heads off?
shouted the queen.
their heads are gone, if it please your majesty!
the soldiers shouted in reply.
thats right!
shouted the queen.
can you play croquet?
the soldiers were silent, and looked at alice, as the question was evidently meant for her.
yes!
shouted alice.
come on, then!
roared the queen, and alice joined the procession, wondering very much what would happen next.
itsits a very fine day!
said a timid voice at her side.
she was walking by the white rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her face.
very, said alice: wheres the duchess?
hush!
hush!
said the rabbit in a low, hurried tone.
he looked anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered shes under sentence of execution.
what for?
said alice.
did you say what a pity!?
the rabbit asked.
no, i didnt, said alice: i dont think its at all a pity.
i said what for?
she boxed the queens ears the rabbit began.
alice gave a little scream of laughter.
oh, hush!
the rabbit whispered in a frightened tone.
the queen will hear you!
you see, she came rather late, and the queen said get to your places!
shouted the queen in a voice of thunder, and people began running about in all directions, tumbling up against each other; however, they got settled down in a minute or two, and the game began.
alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquetground in her life; it was all ridges and furrows; the balls were live hedgehogs, the mallets live flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves up and to stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.
the chief difficulty alice found at first was in managing her flamingo: she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, comfortably enough, under her arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she had got its neck nicely straightened out, and was going to give the hedgehog a blow with its head, it would twist itself round and look up in her face, with such a puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out laughing: and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin again, it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled itself, and was in the act of crawling away: besides all this, there was generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubledup soldiers were always getting up and walking off to other parts of the ground, alice soon came to the conclusion that it was a very difficult game indeed.
the players all played at once without waiting for turns, quarrelling all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very short time the queen was in a furious passion, and went stamping about, and shouting off with his head!
or off with her head!
about once in a minute.
alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet had any dispute with the queen, but she knew that it might happen any minute, and then, thought she, what would become of me?
theyre dreadfully fond of beheading people here; the great wonder is, that theres any one left alive!
she was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering whether she could get away without being seen, when she noticed a curious appearance in the air: it puzzled her very much at first, but, after watching it a minute or two, she made it out to be a grin, and she said to herself its the cheshire cat: now i shall have somebody to talk to.
how are you getting on?
said the cat, as soon as there was mouth enough for it to speak with.
alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded.
its no use speaking to it, she thought, till its ears have come, or at least one of them.
in another minute the whole head appeared, and then alice put down her flamingo, and began an account of the game, feeling very glad she had someone to listen to her.
the cat seemed to think that there was enough of it now in sight, and no more of it appeared.
i dont think they play at all fairly, alice began, in rather a complaining tone, and they all quarrel so dreadfully one cant hear oneself speakand they dont seem to have any rules in particular; at least, if there are, nobody attends to themand youve no idea how confusing it is all the things being alive; for instance, theres the arch ive got to go through next walking about at the other end of the groundand i should have croqueted the queens hedgehog just now, only it ran away when it saw mine coming!
how do you like the queen?
said the cat in a low voice.
not at all, said alice: shes so extremely just then she noticed that the queen was close behind her, listening: so she went on, likely to win, that its hardly worth while finishing the game.
the queen smiled and passed on.
who are you talking to?
said the king, going up to alice, and looking at the cats head with great curiosity.
its a friend of minea cheshire cat, said alice: allow me to introduce it.
i dont like the look of it at all, said the king: however, it may kiss my hand if it likes.
id rather not, the cat remarked.
dont be impertinent, said the king, and dont look at me like that!
he got behind alice as he spoke.
a cat may look at a king, said alice.
ive read that in some book, but i dont remember where.
well, it must be removed, said the king very decidedly, and he called the queen, who was passing at the moment, my dear!
i wish you would have this cat removed!
the queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great or small.
off with his head!
she said, without even looking round.
ill fetch the executioner myself, said the king eagerly, and he hurried off.
alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game was going on, as she heard the queens voice in the distance, screaming with passion.
she had already heard her sentence three of the players to be executed for having missed their turns, and she did not like the look of things at all, as the game was in such confusion that she never knew whether it was her turn or not.
so she went in search of her hedgehog.
the hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, which seemed to alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them with the other: the only difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across to the other side of the garden, where alice could see it trying in a helpless sort of way to fly up into a tree.
by the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the fight was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight: but it doesnt matter much, thought alice, as all the arches are gone from this side of the ground.
so she tucked it away under her arm, that it might not escape again, and went back for a little more conversation with her friend.
when she got back to the cheshire cat, she was surprised to find quite a large crowd collected round it: there was a dispute going on between the executioner, the king, and the queen, who were all talking at once, while all the rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfortable.
the moment alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle the question, and they repeated their arguments to her, though, as they all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed to make out exactly what they said.
the executioners argument was, that you couldnt cut off a head unless there was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had to do such a thing before, and he wasnt going to begin at his time of life.
the kings argument was, that anything that had a head could be beheaded, and that you werent to talk nonsense.
the queens argument was, that if something wasnt done about it in less than no time shed have everybody executed, all round.
(it was this last remark that had made the whole party look so grave and anxious.)
alice could think of nothing else to say but it belongs to the duchess: youd better ask her about it.
shes in prison, the queen said to the executioner: fetch her here.
and the executioner went off like an arrow.
the cats head began fading away the moment he was gone, and, by the time he had come back with the duchess, it had entirely disappeared; so the king and the executioner ran wildly up and down looking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game.
chapter ix.
the mock turtles story you cant think how glad i am to see you again, you dear old thing!
said the duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately into alices, and they walked off together.
alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and thought to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had made her so savage when they met in the kitchen.
when im a duchess, she said to herself, (not in a very hopeful tone though), i wont have any pepper in my kitchen at all.
soup does very well withoutmaybe its always pepper that makes people hottempered, she went on, very much pleased at having found out a new kind of rule, and vinegar that makes them sourand camomile that makes them bitterandand barleysugar and such things that make children sweettempered.
i only wish people knew that: then they wouldnt be so stingy about it, you know she had quite forgotten the duchess by this time, and was a little startled when she heard her voice close to her ear.
youre thinking about something, my dear, and that makes you forget to talk.
i cant tell you just now what the moral of that is, but i shall remember it in a bit.
perhaps it hasnt one, alice ventured to remark.
tut, tut, child!
said the duchess.
everythings got a moral, if only you can find it.
and she squeezed herself up closer to alices side as she spoke.
alice did not much like keeping so close to her: first, because the duchess was very ugly; and secondly, because she was exactly the right height to rest her chin upon alices shoulder, and it was an uncomfortably sharp chin.
however, she did not like to be rude, so she bore it as well as she could.
the games going on rather better now, she said, by way of keeping up the conversation a little.
tis so, said the duchess: and the moral of that isoh, tis love, tis love, that makes the world go round!
somebody said, alice whispered, that its done by everybody minding their own business!
ah, well!
it means much the same thing, said the duchess, digging her sharp little chin into alices shoulder as she added, and the moral of that istake care of the sense, and the sounds will take care of themselves.
how fond she is of finding morals in things!
alice thought to herself.
i dare say youre wondering why i dont put my arm round your waist, the duchess said after a pause: the reason is, that im doubtful about the temper of your flamingo.
shall i try the experiment?
he might bite, alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all anxious to have the experiment tried.
very true, said the duchess: flamingoes and mustard both bite.
and the moral of that isbirds of a feather flock together.
only mustard isnt a bird, alice remarked.
right, as usual, said the duchess: what a clear way you have of putting things!
its a mineral, i think, said alice.
of course it is, said the duchess, who seemed ready to agree to everything that alice said; theres a large mustardmine near here.
and the moral of that isthe more there is of mine, the less there is of yours.
oh, i know!
exclaimed alice, who had not attended to this last remark, its a vegetable.
it doesnt look like one, but it is.
i quite agree with you, said the duchess; and the moral of that isbe what you would seem to beor if youd like it put more simplynever imagine yourself not to be otherwise than what it might appear to others that what you were or might have been was not otherwise than what you had been would have appeared to them to be otherwise.
i think i should understand that better, alice said very politely, if i had it written down: but i cant quite follow it as you say it.
thats nothing to what i could say if i chose, the duchess replied, in a pleased tone.
pray dont trouble yourself to say it any longer than that, said alice.
oh, dont talk about trouble!
said the duchess.
i make you a present of everything ive said as yet.
a cheap sort of present!
thought alice.
im glad they dont give birthday presents like that!
but she did not venture to say it out loud.
thinking again?
the duchess asked, with another dig of her sharp little chin.
ive a right to think, said alice sharply, for she was beginning to feel a little worried.
just about as much right, said the duchess, as pigs have to fly; and the m but here, to alices great surprise, the duchesss voice died away, even in the middle of her favourite word moral, and the arm that was linked into hers began to tremble.
alice looked up, and there stood the queen in front of them, with her arms folded, frowning like a thunderstorm.
a fine day, your majesty!
the duchess began in a low, weak voice.
now, i give you fair warning, shouted the queen, stamping on the ground as she spoke; either you or your head must be off, and that in about half no time!
take your choice!
the duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.
lets go on with the game, the queen said to alice; and alice was too much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her back to the croquetground.
the other guests had taken advantage of the queens absence, and were resting in the shade: however, the moment they saw her, they hurried back to the game, the queen merely remarking that a moments delay would cost them their lives.
all the time they were playing the queen never left off quarrelling with the other players, and shouting off with his head!
or off with her head!
those whom she sentenced were taken into custody by the soldiers, who of course had to leave off being arches to do this, so that by the end of half an hour or so there were no arches left, and all the players, except the king, the queen, and alice, were in custody and under sentence of execution.
then the queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to alice, have you seen the mock turtle yet?
no, said alice.
i dont even know what a mock turtle is.
its the thing mock turtle soup is made from, said the queen.
i never saw one, or heard of one, said alice.
come on, then, said the queen, and he shall tell you his history.
as they walked off together, alice heard the king say in a low voice, to the company generally, you are all pardoned.
come, thats a good thing!
she said to herself, for she had felt quite unhappy at the number of executions the queen had ordered.
they very soon came upon a gryphon, lying fast asleep in the sun.
(if you dont know what a gryphon is, look at the picture.)
up, lazy thing!
said the queen, and take this young lady to see the mock turtle, and to hear his history.
i must go back and see after some executions i have ordered; and she walked off, leaving alice alone with the gryphon.
alice did not quite like the look of the creature, but on the whole she thought it would be quite as safe to stay with it as to go after that savage queen: so she waited.
the gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the queen till she was out of sight: then it chuckled.
what fun!
said the gryphon, half to itself, half to alice.
what is the fun?
said alice.
why, she, said the gryphon.
its all her fancy, that: they never executes nobody, you know.
come on!
everybody says come on!
here, thought alice, as she went slowly after it: i never was so ordered about in all my life, never!
they had not gone far before they saw the mock turtle in the distance, sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they came nearer, alice could hear him sighing as if his heart would break.
she pitied him deeply.
what is his sorrow?
she asked the gryphon, and the gryphon answered, very nearly in the same words as before, its all his fancy, that: he hasnt got no sorrow, you know.
come on!
so they went up to the mock turtle, who looked at them with large eyes full of tears, but said nothing.
this here young lady, said the gryphon, she wants for to know your history, she do.
ill tell it her, said the mock turtle in a deep, hollow tone: sit down, both of you, and dont speak a word till ive finished.
so they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes.
alice thought to herself, i dont see how he can ever finish, if he doesnt begin.
but she waited patiently.
once, said the mock turtle at last, with a deep sigh, i was a real turtle.
these words were followed by a very long silence, broken only by an occasional exclamation of hjckrrh!
from the gryphon, and the constant heavy sobbing of the mock turtle.
alice was very nearly getting up and saying, thank you, sir, for your interesting story, but she could not help thinking there must be more to come, so she sat still and said nothing.
when we were little, the mock turtle went on at last, more calmly, though still sobbing a little now and then, we went to school in the sea.
the master was an old turtlewe used to call him tortoise why did you call him tortoise, if he wasnt one?
alice asked.
we called him tortoise because he taught us, said the mock turtle angrily: really you are very dull!
you ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple question, added the gryphon; and then they both sat silent and looked at poor alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth.
at last the gryphon said to the mock turtle, drive on, old fellow!
dont be all day about it!
and he went on in these words: yes, we went to school in the sea, though you maynt believe it i never said i didnt!
interrupted alice.
you did, said the mock turtle.
hold your tongue!
added the gryphon, before alice could speak again.
the mock turtle went on.
we had the best of educationsin fact, we went to school every day ive been to a dayschool, too, said alice; you neednt be so proud as all that.
with extras?
asked the mock turtle a little anxiously.
yes, said alice, we learned french and music.
and washing?
said the mock turtle.
certainly not!
said alice indignantly.
ah!
then yours wasnt a really good school, said the mock turtle in a tone of great relief.
now at ours they had at the end of the bill, french, music, and washingextra.
you couldnt have wanted it much, said alice; living at the bottom of the sea.
i couldnt afford to learn it.
said the mock turtle with a sigh.
i only took the regular course.
what was that?
inquired alice.
reeling and writhing, of course, to begin with, the mock turtle replied; and then the different branches of arithmeticambition, distraction, uglification, and derision.
i never heard of uglification, alice ventured to say.
what is it?
the gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise.
what!
never heard of uglifying!
it exclaimed.
you know what to beautify is, i suppose?
yes, said alice doubtfully: it meanstomakeanythingprettier.
well, then, the gryphon went on, if you dont know what to uglify is, you are a simpleton.
alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about it, so she turned to the mock turtle, and said what else had you to learn?
well, there was mystery, the mock turtle replied, counting off the subjects on his flappers, mystery, ancient and modern, with seaography: then drawlingthe drawlingmaster was an old congereel, that used to come once a week: he taught us drawling, stretching, and fainting in coils.
what was that like?
said alice.
well, i cant show it you myself, the mock turtle said: im too stiff.
and the gryphon never learnt it.
hadnt time, said the gryphon: i went to the classics master, though.
he was an old crab, he was.
i never went to him, the mock turtle said with a sigh: he taught laughing and grief, they used to say.
so he did, so he did, said the gryphon, sighing in his turn; and both creatures hid their faces in their paws.
and how many hours a day did you do lessons?
said alice, in a hurry to change the subject.
ten hours the first day, said the mock turtle: nine the next, and so on.
what a curious plan!
exclaimed alice.
thats the reason theyre called lessons, the gryphon remarked: because they lessen from day to day.
this was quite a new idea to alice, and she thought it over a little before she made her next remark.
then the eleventh day must have been a holiday?
of course it was, said the mock turtle.
and how did you manage on the twelfth?
alice went on eagerly.
thats enough about lessons, the gryphon interrupted in a very decided tone: tell her something about the games now.
chapter x. the lobster quadrille the mock turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper across his eyes.
he looked at alice, and tried to speak, but for a minute or two sobs choked his voice.
same as if he had a bone in his throat, said the gryphon: and it set to work shaking him and punching him in the back.
at last the mock turtle recovered his voice, and, with tears running down his cheeks, he went on again: you may not have lived much under the sea (i havent, said alice)and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster (alice began to say i once tasted but checked herself hastily, and said no, never) so you can have no idea what a delightful thing a lobster quadrille is!
no, indeed, said alice.
what sort of a dance is it?
why, said the gryphon, you first form into a line along the seashore two lines!
cried the mock turtle.
seals, turtles, salmon, and so on; then, when youve cleared all the jellyfish out of the way that generally takes some time, interrupted the gryphon.
you advance twice each with a lobster as a partner!
cried the gryphon.
of course, the mock turtle said: advance twice, set to partners change lobsters, and retire in same order, continued the gryphon.
then, you know, the mock turtle went on, you throw the the lobsters!
shouted the gryphon, with a bound into the air.
as far out to sea as you can swim after them!
screamed the gryphon.
turn a somersault in the sea!
cried the mock turtle, capering wildly about.
change lobsters again!
yelled the gryphon at the top of its voice.
back to land again, and thats all the first figure, said the mock turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and the two creatures, who had been jumping about like mad things all this time, sat down again very sadly and quietly, and looked at alice.
it must be a very pretty dance, said alice timidly.
would you like to see a little of it?
said the mock turtle.
very much indeed, said alice.
come, lets try the first figure!
said the mock turtle to the gryphon.
we can do without lobsters, you know.
which shall sing?
oh, you sing, said the gryphon.
ive forgotten the words.
so they began solemnly dancing round and round alice, every now and then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and waving their forepaws to mark the time, while the mock turtle sang this, very slowly and sadly: will you walk a little faster?
said a whiting to a snail.
theres a porpoise close behind us, and hes treading on my tail.
see how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!
they are waiting on the shinglewill you come and join the dance?
will you, wont you, will you, wont you, will you join the dance?
will you, wont you, will you, wont you, wont you join the dance?
you can really have no notion how delightful it will be when they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to sea!
but the snail replied too far, too far!
and gave a look askance said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the dance.
would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join the dance.
would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join the dance.
what matters it how far we go?
his scaly friend replied.
there is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
the further off from england the nearer is to france then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance.
will you, wont you, will you, wont you, will you join the dance?
will you, wont you, will you, wont you, wont you join the dance?
thank you, its a very interesting dance to watch, said alice, feeling very glad that it was over at last: and i do so like that curious song about the whiting!
oh, as to the whiting, said the mock turtle, theyyouve seen them, of course?
yes, said alice, ive often seen them at dinn she checked herself hastily.
i dont know where dinn may be, said the mock turtle, but if youve seen them so often, of course you know what theyre like.
i believe so, alice replied thoughtfully.
they have their tails in their mouthsand theyre all over crumbs.
youre wrong about the crumbs, said the mock turtle: crumbs would all wash off in the sea.
but they have their tails in their mouths; and the reason is here the mock turtle yawned and shut his eyes.tell her about the reason and all that, he said to the gryphon.
the reason is, said the gryphon, that they would go with the lobsters to the dance.
so they got thrown out to sea.
so they had to fall a long way.
so they got their tails fast in their mouths.
so they couldnt get them out again.
thats all.
thank you, said alice, its very interesting.
i never knew so much about a whiting before.
i can tell you more than that, if you like, said the gryphon.
do you know why its called a whiting?
i never thought about it, said alice.
why?
it does the boots and shoes, the gryphon replied very solemnly.
alice was thoroughly puzzled.
does the boots and shoes!
she repeated in a wondering tone.
why, what are your shoes done with?
said the gryphon.
i mean, what makes them so shiny?
alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she gave her answer.
theyre done with blacking, i believe.
boots and shoes under the sea, the gryphon went on in a deep voice, are done with a whiting.
now you know.
and what are they made of?
alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.
soles and eels, of course, the gryphon replied rather impatiently: any shrimp could have told you that.
if id been the whiting, said alice, whose thoughts were still running on the song, id have said to the porpoise, keep back, please: we dont want you with us!
they were obliged to have him with them, the mock turtle said: no wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.
wouldnt it really?
said alice in a tone of great surprise.
of course not, said the mock turtle: why, if a fish came to me, and told me he was going a journey, i should say with what porpoise?
dont you mean purpose?
said alice.
i mean what i say, the mock turtle replied in an offended tone.
and the gryphon added come, lets hear some of your adventures.
i could tell you my adventuresbeginning from this morning, said alice a little timidly: but its no use going back to yesterday, because i was a different person then.
explain all that, said the mock turtle.
no, no!
the adventures first, said the gryphon in an impatient tone: explanations take such a dreadful time.
so alice began telling them her adventures from the time when she first saw the white rabbit.
she was a little nervous about it just at first, the two creatures got so close to her, one on each side, and opened their eyes and mouths so very wide, but she gained courage as she went on.
her listeners were perfectly quiet till she got to the part about her repeating you are old, father william, to the caterpillar, and the words all coming different, and then the mock turtle drew a long breath, and said thats very curious.
its all about as curious as it can be, said the gryphon.
it all came different!
the mock turtle repeated thoughtfully.
i should like to hear her try and repeat something now.
tell her to begin.
he looked at the gryphon as if he thought it had some kind of authority over alice.
stand up and repeat tis the voice of the sluggard, said the gryphon.
how the creatures order one about, and make one repeat lessons!
thought alice; i might as well be at school at once.
however, she got up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so full of the lobster quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was saying, and the words came very queer indeed: tis the voice of the lobster; i heard him declare, you have baked me too brown, i must sugar my hair.
as a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.
later editions continued as follows when the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark, and will talk in contemptuous tones of the shark, but, when the tide rises and sharks are around, his voice has a timid and tremulous sound.
thats different from what i used to say when i was a child, said the gryphon.
well, i never heard it before, said the mock turtle; but it sounds uncommon nonsense.
alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her hands, wondering if anything would ever happen in a natural way again.
i should like to have it explained, said the mock turtle.
she cant explain it, said the gryphon hastily.
go on with the next verse.
but about his toes?
the mock turtle persisted.
how could he turn them out with his nose, you know?
its the first position in dancing.
alice said; but was dreadfully puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the subject.
go on with the next verse, the gryphon repeated impatiently: it begins i passed by his garden.
alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would all come wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice: i passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye, how the owl and the panther were sharing a pie later editions continued as follows the panther took piecrust, and gravy, and meat, while the owl had the dish as its share of the treat.
when the pie was all finished, the owl, as a boon, was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon: while the panther received knife and fork with a growl, and concluded the banquet what is the use of repeating all that stuff, the mock turtle interrupted, if you dont explain it as you go on?
its by far the most confusing thing i ever heard!
yes, i think youd better leave off, said the gryphon: and alice was only too glad to do so.
shall we try another figure of the lobster quadrille?
the gryphon went on.
or would you like the mock turtle to sing you a song?
oh, a song, please, if the mock turtle would be so kind, alice replied, so eagerly that the gryphon said, in a rather offended tone, hm!
no accounting for tastes!
sing her turtle soup, will you, old fellow?
the mock turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes choked with sobs, to sing this: beautiful soup, so rich and green, waiting in a hot tureen!
who for such dainties would not stoop?
soup of the evening, beautiful soup!
soup of the evening, beautiful soup!
beauootiful soooop!
beauootiful soooop!
soooop of the eeevening, beautiful, beautiful soup!
beautiful soup!
who cares for fish, game, or any other dish?
who would not give all else for two p ennyworth only of beautiful soup?
pennyworth only of beautiful soup?
beauootiful soooop!
beauootiful soooop!
soooop of the eeevening, beautiful, beautiful soup!
chorus again!
cried the gryphon, and the mock turtle had just begun to repeat it, when a cry of the trials beginning!
was heard in the distance.
come on!
cried the gryphon, and, taking alice by the hand, it hurried off, without waiting for the end of the song.
what trial is it?
alice panted as she ran; but the gryphon only answered come on!
and ran the faster, while more and more faintly came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the melancholy words: soooop of the eeevening, beautiful, beautiful soup!
chapter xi.
who stole the tarts?
the king and queen of hearts were seated on their throne when they arrived, with a great crowd assembled about themall sorts of little birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: the knave was standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on each side to guard him; and near the king was the white rabbit, with a trumpet in one hand, and a scroll of parchment in the other.
in the very middle of the court was a table, with a large dish of tarts upon it: they looked so good, that it made alice quite hungry to look at themi wish theyd get the trial done, she thought, and hand round the refreshments!
but there seemed to be no chance of this, so she began looking at everything about her, to pass away the time.
alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had read about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that she knew the name of nearly everything there.
thats the judge, she said to herself, because of his great wig.
the judge, by the way, was the king; and as he wore his crown over the wig, (look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he did it,) he did not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly not becoming.
and thats the jurybox, thought alice, and those twelve creatures, (she was obliged to say creatures, you see, because some of them were animals, and some were birds,) i suppose they are the jurors.
she said this last word two or three times over to herself, being rather proud of it: for she thought, and rightly too, that very few little girls of her age knew the meaning of it at all.
however, jurymen would have done just as well.
the twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates.
what are they doing?
alice whispered to the gryphon.
they cant have anything to put down yet, before the trials begun.
theyre putting down their names, the gryphon whispered in reply, for fear they should forget them before the end of the trial.
stupid things!
alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but she stopped hastily, for the white rabbit cried out, silence in the court!
and the king put on his spectacles and looked anxiously round, to make out who was talking.
alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their shoulders, that all the jurors were writing down stupid things!
on their slates, and she could even make out that one of them didnt know how to spell stupid, and that he had to ask his neighbour to tell him.
a nice muddle their slatesll be in before the trials over!
thought alice.
one of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked.
this of course, alice could not stand, and she went round the court and got behind him, and very soon found an opportunity of taking it away.
she did it so quickly that the poor little juror (it was bill, the lizard) could not make out at all what had become of it; so, after hunting all about for it, he was obliged to write with one finger for the rest of the day; and this was of very little use, as it left no mark on the slate.
herald, read the accusation!
said the king.
on this the white rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and then unrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows: the queen of hearts, she made some tarts, all on a summer day: the knave of hearts, he stole those tarts, and took them quite away!
consider your verdict, the king said to the jury.
not yet, not yet!
the rabbit hastily interrupted.
theres a great deal to come before that!
call the first witness, said the king; and the white rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and called out, first witness!
the first witness was the hatter.
he came in with a teacup in one hand and a piece of breadandbutter in the other.
i beg pardon, your majesty, he began, for bringing these in: but i hadnt quite finished my tea when i was sent for.
you ought to have finished, said the king.
when did you begin?
the hatter looked at the march hare, who had followed him into the court, arminarm with the dormouse.
fourteenth of march, i think it was, he said.
fifteenth, said the march hare.
sixteenth, added the dormouse.
write that down, the king said to the jury, and the jury eagerly wrote down all three dates on their slates, and then added them up, and reduced the answer to shillings and pence.
take off your hat, the king said to the hatter.
it isnt mine, said the hatter.
stolen!
the king exclaimed, turning to the jury, who instantly made a memorandum of the fact.
i keep them to sell, the hatter added as an explanation; ive none of my own.
im a hatter.
here the queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at the hatter, who turned pale and fidgeted.
give your evidence, said the king; and dont be nervous, or ill have you executed on the spot.
this did not seem to encourage the witness at all: he kept shifting from one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the queen, and in his confusion he bit a large piece out of his teacup instead of the breadandbutter.
just at this moment alice felt a very curious sensation, which puzzled her a good deal until she made out what it was: she was beginning to grow larger again, and she thought at first she would get up and leave the court; but on second thoughts she decided to remain where she was as long as there was room for her.
i wish you wouldnt squeeze so, said the dormouse, who was sitting next to her.
i can hardly breathe.
i cant help it, said alice very meekly: im growing.
youve no right to grow here, said the dormouse.
dont talk nonsense, said alice more boldly: you know youre growing too.
yes, but i grow at a reasonable pace, said the dormouse: not in that ridiculous fashion.
and he got up very sulkily and crossed over to the other side of the court.
all this time the queen had never left off staring at the hatter, and, just as the dormouse crossed the court, she said to one of the officers of the court, bring me the list of the singers in the last concert!
on which the wretched hatter trembled so, that he shook both his shoes off.
give your evidence, the king repeated angrily, or ill have you executed, whether youre nervous or not.
im a poor man, your majesty, the hatter began, in a trembling voice, and i hadnt begun my teanot above a week or soand what with the breadandbutter getting so thinand the twinkling of the tea the twinkling of the what?
said the king.
it began with the tea, the hatter replied.
of course twinkling begins with a t!
said the king sharply.
do you take me for a dunce?
go on!
im a poor man, the hatter went on, and most things twinkled after thatonly the march hare said i didnt!
the march hare interrupted in a great hurry.
you did!
said the hatter.
i deny it!
said the march hare.
he denies it, said the king: leave out that part.
well, at any rate, the dormouse said the hatter went on, looking anxiously round to see if he would deny it too: but the dormouse denied nothing, being fast asleep.
after that, continued the hatter, i cut some more breadandbutter but what did the dormouse say?
one of the jury asked.
that i cant remember, said the hatter.
you must remember, remarked the king, or ill have you executed.
the miserable hatter dropped his teacup and breadandbutter, and went down on one knee.
im a poor man, your majesty, he began.
youre a very poor speaker, said the king.
here one of the guineapigs cheered, and was immediately suppressed by the officers of the court.
(as that is rather a hard word, i will just explain to you how it was done.
they had a large canvas bag, which tied up at the mouth with strings: into this they slipped the guineapig, head first, and then sat upon it.)
im glad ive seen that done, thought alice.
ive so often read in the newspapers, at the end of trials, there was some attempts at applause, which was immediately suppressed by the officers of the court, and i never understood what it meant till now.
if thats all you know about it, you may stand down, continued the king.
i cant go no lower, said the hatter: im on the floor, as it is.
then you may sit down, the king replied.
here the other guineapig cheered, and was suppressed.
come, that finished the guineapigs!
thought alice.
now we shall get on better.
id rather finish my tea, said the hatter, with an anxious look at the queen, who was reading the list of singers.
you may go, said the king, and the hatter hurriedly left the court, without even waiting to put his shoes on.
and just take his head off outside, the queen added to one of the officers: but the hatter was out of sight before the officer could get to the door.
call the next witness!
said the king.
the next witness was the duchesss cook.
she carried the pepperbox in her hand, and alice guessed who it was, even before she got into the court, by the way the people near the door began sneezing all at once.
give your evidence, said the king.
shant, said the cook.
the king looked anxiously at the white rabbit, who said in a low voice, your majesty must crossexamine this witness.
well, if i must, i must, the king said, with a melancholy air, and, after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till his eyes were nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, what are tarts made of?
pepper, mostly, said the cook.
treacle, said a sleepy voice behind her.
collar that dormouse, the queen shrieked out.
behead that dormouse!
turn that dormouse out of court!
suppress him!
pinch him!
off with his whiskers!
for some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the dormouse turned out, and, by the time they had settled down again, the cook had disappeared.
never mind!
said the king, with an air of great relief.
call the next witness.
and he added in an undertone to the queen, really, my dear, you must crossexamine the next witness.
it quite makes my forehead ache!
alice watched the white rabbit as he fumbled over the list, feeling very curious to see what the next witness would be like, for they havent got much evidence yet, she said to herself.
imagine her surprise, when the white rabbit read out, at the top of his shrill little voice, the name alice!
chapter xii.
alices evidence here!
cried alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the moment how large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she jumped up in such a hurry that she tipped over the jurybox with the edge of her skirt, upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads of the crowd below, and there they lay sprawling about, reminding her very much of a globe of goldfish she had accidentally upset the week before.
oh, i beg your pardon!
she exclaimed in a tone of great dismay, and began picking them up again as quickly as she could, for the accident of the goldfish kept running in her head, and she had a vague sort of idea that they must be collected at once and put back into the jurybox, or they would die.
the trial cannot proceed, said the king in a very grave voice, until all the jurymen are back in their proper placesall, he repeated with great emphasis, looking hard at alice as he said so.
alice looked at the jurybox, and saw that, in her haste, she had put the lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing was waving its tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable to move.
she soon got it out again, and put it right; not that it signifies much, she said to herself; i should think it would be quite as much use in the trial one way up as the other.
as soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of being upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and handed back to them, they set to work very diligently to write out a history of the accident, all except the lizard, who seemed too much overcome to do anything but sit with its mouth open, gazing up into the roof of the court.
what do you know about this business?
the king said to alice.
nothing, said alice.
nothing whatever?
persisted the king.
nothing whatever, said alice.
thats very important, the king said, turning to the jury.
they were just beginning to write this down on their slates, when the white rabbit interrupted: unimportant, your majesty means, of course, he said in a very respectful tone, but frowning and making faces at him as he spoke.
unimportant, of course, i meant, the king hastily said, and went on to himself in an undertone, importantunimportantunimportantimportant as if he were trying which word sounded best.
some of the jury wrote it down important, and some unimportant.
alice could see this, as she was near enough to look over their slates; but it doesnt matter a bit, she thought to herself.
at this moment the king, who had been for some time busily writing in his notebook, cackled out silence!
and read out from his book, rule fortytwo.
all persons more than a mile high to leave the court.
everybody looked at alice.
im not a mile high, said alice.
you are, said the king.
nearly two miles high, added the queen.
well, i shant go, at any rate, said alice: besides, thats not a regular rule: you invented it just now.
its the oldest rule in the book, said the king.
then it ought to be number one, said alice.
the king turned pale, and shut his notebook hastily.
consider your verdict, he said to the jury, in a low, trembling voice.
theres more evidence to come yet, please your majesty, said the white rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry; this paper has just been picked up.
whats in it?
said the queen.
i havent opened it yet, said the white rabbit, but it seems to be a letter, written by the prisoner toto somebody.
it must have been that, said the king, unless it was written to nobody, which isnt usual, you know.
who is it directed to?
said one of the jurymen.
it isnt directed at all, said the white rabbit; in fact, theres nothing written on the outside.
he unfolded the paper as he spoke, and added it isnt a letter, after all: its a set of verses.
are they in the prisoners handwriting?
asked another of the jurymen.
no, theyre not, said the white rabbit, and thats the queerest thing about it.
(the jury all looked puzzled.)
he must have imitated somebody elses hand, said the king.
(the jury all brightened up again.)
please your majesty, said the knave, i didnt write it, and they cant prove i did: theres no name signed at the end.
if you didnt sign it, said the king, that only makes the matter worse.
you must have meant some mischief, or else youd have signed your name like an honest man.
there was a general clapping of hands at this: it was the first really clever thing the king had said that day.
that proves his guilt, said the queen.
it proves nothing of the sort!
said alice.
why, you dont even know what theyre about!
read them, said the king.
the white rabbit put on his spectacles.
where shall i begin, please your majesty?
he asked.
begin at the beginning, the king said gravely, and go on till you come to the end: then stop.
these were the verses the white rabbit read: they told me you had been to her, and mentioned me to him: she gave me a good character, but said i could not swim.
he sent them word i had not gone (we know it to be true): if she should push the matter on, what would become of you?
i gave her one, they gave him two, you gave us three or more; they all returned from him to you, though they were mine before.
if i or she should chance to be involved in this affair, he trusts to you to set them free, exactly as we were.
my notion was that you had been (before she had this fit) an obstacle that came between him, and ourselves, and it.
dont let him know she liked them best, for this must ever be a secret, kept from all the rest, between yourself and me.
thats the most important piece of evidence weve heard yet, said the king, rubbing his hands; so now let the jury if any one of them can explain it, said alice, (she had grown so large in the last few minutes that she wasnt a bit afraid of interrupting him,) ill give him sixpence.
i dont believe theres an atom of meaning in it.
the jury all wrote down on their slates, she doesnt believe theres an atom of meaning in it, but none of them attempted to explain the paper.
if theres no meaning in it, said the king, that saves a world of trouble, you know, as we neednt try to find any.
and yet i dont know, he went on, spreading out the verses on his knee, and looking at them with one eye; i seem to see some meaning in them, after all.
said i could not swim you cant swim, can you?
he added, turning to the knave.
the knave shook his head sadly.
do i look like it?
he said.
(which he certainly did not, being made entirely of cardboard.)
all right, so far, said the king, and he went on muttering over the verses to himself: we know it to be true thats the jury, of coursei gave her one, they gave him two why, that must be what he did with the tarts, you know but, it goes on they all returned from him to you, said alice.
why, there they are!
said the king triumphantly, pointing to the tarts on the table.
nothing can be clearer than that.
then againbefore she had this fit you never had fits, my dear, i think?
he said to the queen.
never!
said the queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the lizard as she spoke.
(the unfortunate little bill had left off writing on his slate with one finger, as he found it made no mark; but he now hastily began again, using the ink, that was trickling down his face, as long as it lasted.)
then the words dont fit you, said the king, looking round the court with a smile.
there was a dead silence.
its a pun!
the king added in an offended tone, and everybody laughed, let the jury consider their verdict, the king said, for about the twentieth time that day.
no, no!
said the queen.
sentence firstverdict afterwards.
stuff and nonsense!
said alice loudly.
the idea of having the sentence first!
hold your tongue!
said the queen, turning purple.
i wont!
said alice.
off with her head!
the queen shouted at the top of her voice.
nobody moved.
who cares for you?
said alice, (she had grown to her full size by this time.)
youre nothing but a pack of cards!
at this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying down upon her: she gave a little scream, half of fright and half of anger, and tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on the bank, with her head in the lap of her sister, who was gently brushing away some dead leaves that had fluttered down from the trees upon her face.
wake up, alice dear!
said her sister; why, what a long sleep youve had!
oh, ive had such a curious dream!
said alice, and she told her sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange adventures of hers that you have just been reading about; and when she had finished, her sister kissed her, and said, it was a curious dream, dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea; its getting late.
so alice got up and ran off, thinking while she ran, as well she might, what a wonderful dream it had been.
but her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her head on her hand, watching the setting sun, and thinking of little alice and all her wonderful adventures, till she too began dreaming after a fashion, and this was her dream: first, she dreamed of little alice herself, and once again the tiny hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes were looking up into hersshe could hear the very tones of her voice, and see that queer little toss of her head to keep back the wandering hair that would always get into her eyesand still as she listened, or seemed to listen, the whole place around her became alive with the strange creatures of her little sisters dream.
the long grass rustled at her feet as the white rabbit hurried bythe frightened mouse splashed his way through the neighbouring poolshe could hear the rattle of the teacups as the march hare and his friends shared their neverending meal, and the shrill voice of the queen ordering off her unfortunate guests to executiononce more the pigbaby was sneezing on the duchesss knee, while plates and dishes crashed around itonce more the shriek of the gryphon, the squeaking of the lizards slatepencil, and the choking of the suppressed guineapigs, filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable mock turtle.
so she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and all would change to dull realitythe grass would be only rustling in the wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the reedsthe rattling teacups would change to tinkling sheepbells, and the queens shrill cries to the voice of the shepherd boyand the sneeze of the baby, the shriek of the gryphon, and all the other queer noises, would change (she knew) to the confused clamour of the busy farmyardwhile the lowing of the cattle in the distance would take the place of the mock turtles heavy sobs.
lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of hers would, in the aftertime, be herself a grown woman; and how she would keep, through all her riper years, the simple and loving heart of her childhood: and how she would gather about her other little children, and make their eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale, perhaps even with the dream of wonderland of long ago: and how she would feel with all their simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their simple joys, remembering her own childlife, and the happy summer days.
the end  end of the project gutenberg ebook 11
start of the project gutenberg ebook 84  frankenstein; or, the modern prometheus by mary wollstonecraft (godwin) shelley contents letter 1 letter 2 letter 3 letter 4 chapter 1 chapter 2 chapter 3 chapter 4 chapter 5 chapter 6 chapter 7 chapter 8 chapter 9 chapter 10 chapter 11 chapter 12 chapter 13 chapter 14 chapter 15 chapter 16 chapter 17 chapter 18 chapter 19 chapter 20 chapter 21 chapter 22 chapter 23 chapter 24 letter 1 to mrs. saville, england.
st. petersburgh, dec. 11th, 17. you will rejoice to hear that no disaster has accompanied the commencement of an enterprise which you have regarded with such evil forebodings.
i arrived here yesterday, and my first task is to assure my dear sister of my welfare and increasing confidence in the success of my undertaking.
i am already far north of london, and as i walk in the streets of petersburgh, i feel a cold northern breeze play upon my cheeks, which braces my nerves and fills me with delight.
do you understand this feeling?
this breeze, which has travelled from the regions towards which i am advancing, gives me a foretaste of those icy climes.
inspirited by this wind of promise, my daydreams become more fervent and vivid.
i try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of frost and desolation; it ever presents itself to my imagination as the region of beauty and delight.
there, margaret, the sun is for ever visible, its broad disk just skirting the horizon and diffusing a perpetual splendour.
therefor with your leave, my sister, i will put some trust in preceding navigatorsthere snow and frost are banished; and, sailing over a calm sea, we may be wafted to a land surpassing in wonders and in beauty every region hitherto discovered on the habitable globe.
its productions and features may be without example, as the phenomena of the heavenly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered solitudes.
what may not be expected in a country of eternal light?
i may there discover the wondrous power which attracts the needle and may regulate a thousand celestial observations that require only this voyage to render their seeming eccentricities consistent for ever.
i shall satiate my ardent curiosity with the sight of a part of the world never before visited, and may tread a land never before imprinted by the foot of man.
these are my enticements, and they are sufficient to conquer all fear of danger or death and to induce me to commence this laborious voyage with the joy a child feels when he embarks in a little boat, with his holiday mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river.
but supposing all these conjectures to be false, you cannot contest the inestimable benefit which i shall confer on all mankind, to the last generation, by discovering a passage near the pole to those countries, to reach which at present so many months are requisite; or by ascertaining the secret of the magnet, which, if at all possible, can only be effected by an undertaking such as mine.
these reflections have dispelled the agitation with which i began my letter, and i feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm which elevates me to heaven, for nothing contributes so much to tranquillise the mind as a steady purposea point on which the soul may fix its intellectual eye.
this expedition has been the favourite dream of my early years.
i have read with ardour the accounts of the various voyages which have been made in the prospect of arriving at the north pacific ocean through the seas which surround the pole.
you may remember that a history of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of our good uncle thomas library.
my education was neglected, yet i was passionately fond of reading.
these volumes were my study day and night, and my familiarity with them increased that regret which i had felt, as a child, on learning that my fathers dying injunction had forbidden my uncle to allow me to embark in a seafaring life.
these visions faded when i perused, for the first time, those poets whose effusions entranced my soul and lifted it to heaven.
i also became a poet and for one year lived in a paradise of my own creation; i imagined that i also might obtain a niche in the temple where the names of homer and shakespeare are consecrated.
you are well acquainted with my failure and how heavily i bore the disappointment.
but just at that time i inherited the fortune of my cousin, and my thoughts were turned into the channel of their earlier bent.
six years have passed since i resolved on my present undertaking.
i can, even now, remember the hour from which i dedicated myself to this great enterprise.
i commenced by inuring my body to hardship.
i accompanied the whalefishers on several expeditions to the north sea; i voluntarily endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; i often worked harder than the common sailors during the day and devoted my nights to the study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those branches of physical science from which a naval adventurer might derive the greatest practical advantage.
twice i actually hired myself as an undermate in a greenland whaler, and acquitted myself to admiration.
i must own i felt a little proud when my captain offered me the second dignity in the vessel and entreated me to remain with the greatest earnestness, so valuable did he consider my services.
and now, dear margaret, do i not deserve to accomplish some great purpose?
my life might have been passed in ease and luxury, but i preferred glory to every enticement that wealth placed in my path.
oh, that some encouraging voice would answer in the affirmative!
my courage and my resolution is firm; but my hopes fluctuate, and my spirits are often depressed.
i am about to proceed on a long and difficult voyage, the emergencies of which will demand all my fortitude: i am required not only to raise the spirits of others, but sometimes to sustain my own, when theirs are failing.
this is the most favourable period for travelling in russia.
they fly quickly over the snow in their sledges; the motion is pleasant, and, in my opinion, far more agreeable than that of an english stagecoach.
the cold is not excessive, if you are wrapped in fursa dress which i have already adopted, for there is a great difference between walking the deck and remaining seated motionless for hours, when no exercise prevents the blood from actually freezing in your veins.
i have no ambition to lose my life on the postroad between st. petersburgh and archangel.
i shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks; and my intention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be done by paying the insurance for the owner, and to engage as many sailors as i think necessary among those who are accustomed to the whalefishing.
i do not intend to sail until the month of june; and when shall i return?
ah, dear sister, how can i answer this question?
if i succeed, many, many months, perhaps years, will pass before you and i may meet.
if i fail, you will see me again soon, or never.
farewell, my dear, excellent margaret.
heaven shower down blessings on you, and save me, that i may again and again testify my gratitude for all your love and kindness.
your affectionate brother, r. walton letter 2 to mrs. saville, england.
archangel, 28th march, 17. how slowly the time passes here, encompassed as i am by frost and snow!
yet a second step is taken towards my enterprise.
i have hired a vessel and am occupied in collecting my sailors; those whom i have already engaged appear to be men on whom i can depend and are certainly possessed of dauntless courage.
but i have one want which i have never yet been able to satisfy, and the absence of the object of which i now feel as a most severe evil, i have no friend, margaret: when i am glowing with the enthusiasm of success, there will be none to participate my joy; if i am assailed by disappointment, no one will endeavour to sustain me in dejection.
i shall commit my thoughts to paper, it is true; but that is a poor medium for the communication of feeling.
i desire the company of a man who could sympathise with me, whose eyes would reply to mine.
you may deem me romantic, my dear sister, but i bitterly feel the want of a friend.
i have no one near me, gentle yet courageous, possessed of a cultivated as well as of a capacious mind, whose tastes are like my own, to approve or amend my plans.
how would such a friend repair the faults of your poor brother!
i am too ardent in execution and too impatient of difficulties.
but it is a still greater evil to me that i am selfeducated: for the first fourteen years of my life i ran wild on a common and read nothing but our uncle thomas books of voyages.
at that age i became acquainted with the celebrated poets of our own country; but it was only when it had ceased to be in my power to derive its most important benefits from such a conviction that i perceived the necessity of becoming acquainted with more languages than that of my native country.
now i am twentyeight and am in reality more illiterate than many schoolboys of fifteen.
it is true that i have thought more and that my daydreams are more extended and magnificent, but they want (as the painters call it) keeping; and i greatly need a friend who would have sense enough not to despise me as romantic, and affection enough for me to endeavour to regulate my mind.
well, these are useless complaints; i shall certainly find no friend on the wide ocean, nor even here in archangel, among merchants and seamen.
yet some feelings, unallied to the dross of human nature, beat even in these rugged bosoms.
my lieutenant, for instance, is a man of wonderful courage and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory, or rather, to word my phrase more characteristically, of advancement in his profession.
he is an englishman, and in the midst of national and professional prejudices, unsoftened by cultivation, retains some of the noblest endowments of humanity.
i first became acquainted with him on board a whale vessel; finding that he was unemployed in this city, i easily engaged him to assist in my enterprise.
the master is a person of an excellent disposition and is remarkable in the ship for his gentleness and the mildness of his discipline.
this circumstance, added to his wellknown integrity and dauntless courage, made me very desirous to engage him.
a youth passed in solitude, my best years spent under your gentle and feminine fosterage, has so refined the groundwork of my character that i cannot overcome an intense distaste to the usual brutality exercised on board ship: i have never believed it to be necessary, and when i heard of a mariner equally noted for his kindliness of heart and the respect and obedience paid to him by his crew, i felt myself peculiarly fortunate in being able to secure his services.
i heard of him first in rather a romantic manner, from a lady who owes to him the happiness of her life.
this, briefly, is his story.
some years ago he loved a young russian lady of moderate fortune, and having amassed a considerable sum in prizemoney, the father of the girl consented to the match.
he saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she was bathed in tears, and throwing herself at his feet, entreated him to spare her, confessing at the same time that she loved another, but that he was poor, and that her father would never consent to the union.
my generous friend reassured the suppliant, and on being informed of the name of her lover, instantly abandoned his pursuit.
he had already bought a farm with his money, on which he had designed to pass the remainder of his life; but he bestowed the whole on his rival, together with the remains of his prizemoney to purchase stock, and then himself solicited the young womans father to consent to her marriage with her lover.
but the old man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound in honour to my friend, who, when he found the father inexorable, quitted his country, nor returned until he heard that his former mistress was married according to her inclinations.
what a noble fellow!
you will exclaim.
he is so; but then he is wholly uneducated: he is as silent as a turk, and a kind of ignorant carelessness attends him, which, while it renders his conduct the more astonishing, detracts from the interest and sympathy which otherwise he would command.
yet do not suppose, because i complain a little or because i can conceive a consolation for my toils which i may never know, that i am wavering in my resolutions.
those are as fixed as fate, and my voyage is only now delayed until the weather shall permit my embarkation.
the winter has been dreadfully severe, but the spring promises well, and it is considered as a remarkably early season, so that perhaps i may sail sooner than i expected.
i shall do nothing rashly: you know me sufficiently to confide in my prudence and considerateness whenever the safety of others is committed to my care.
i cannot describe to you my sensations on the near prospect of my undertaking.
it is impossible to communicate to you a conception of the trembling sensation, half pleasurable and half fearful, with which i am preparing to depart.
i am going to unexplored regions, to the land of mist and snow, but i shall kill no albatross; therefore do not be alarmed for my safety or if i should come back to you as worn and woeful as the ancient mariner.
you will smile at my allusion, but i will disclose a secret.
i have often attributed my attachment to, my passionate enthusiasm for, the dangerous mysteries of ocean to that production of the most imaginative of modern poets.
there is something at work in my soul which i do not understand.
i am practically industriouspainstaking, a workman to execute with perseverance and labourbut besides this there is a love for the marvellous, a belief in the marvellous, intertwined in all my projects, which hurries me out of the common pathways of men, even to the wild sea and unvisited regions i am about to explore.
but to return to dearer considerations.
shall i meet you again, after having traversed immense seas, and returned by the most southern cape of africa or america?
i dare not expect such success, yet i cannot bear to look on the reverse of the picture.
continue for the present to write to me by every opportunity: i may receive your letters on some occasions when i need them most to support my spirits.
i love you very tenderly.
remember me with affection, should you never hear from me again.
your affectionate brother, robert walton letter 3 to mrs. saville, england.
july 7th, 17. my dear sister, i write a few lines in haste to say that i am safeand well advanced on my voyage.
this letter will reach england by a merchantman now on its homeward voyage from archangel; more fortunate than i, who may not see my native land, perhaps, for many years.
i am, however, in good spirits: my men are bold and apparently firm of purpose, nor do the floating sheets of ice that continually pass us, indicating the dangers of the region towards which we are advancing, appear to dismay them.
we have already reached a very high latitude; but it is the height of summer, and although not so warm as in england, the southern gales, which blow us speedily towards those shores which i so ardently desire to attain, breathe a degree of renovating warmth which i had not expected.
no incidents have hitherto befallen us that would make a figure in a letter.
one or two stiff gales and the springing of a leak are accidents which experienced navigators scarcely remember to record, and i shall be well content if nothing worse happen to us during our voyage.
adieu, my dear margaret.
be assured that for my own sake, as well as yours, i will not rashly encounter danger.
i will be cool, persevering, and prudent.
but success shall crown my endeavours.
wherefore not?
thus far i have gone, tracing a secure way over the pathless seas, the very stars themselves being witnesses and testimonies of my triumph.
why not still proceed over the untamed yet obedient element?
what can stop the determined heart and resolved will of man?
my swelling heart involuntarily pours itself out thus.
but i must finish.
heaven bless my beloved sister!
r.w.
letter 4 to mrs. saville, england.
august 5th, 17. so strange an accident has happened to us that i cannot forbear recording it, although it is very probable that you will see me before these papers can come into your possession.
last monday (july 31st) we were nearly surrounded by ice, which closed in the ship on all sides, scarcely leaving her the searoom in which she floated.
our situation was somewhat dangerous, especially as we were compassed round by a very thick fog.
we accordingly lay to, hoping that some change would take place in the atmosphere and weather.
about two oclock the mist cleared away, and we beheld, stretched out in every direction, vast and irregular plains of ice, which seemed to have no end.
some of my comrades groaned, and my own mind began to grow watchful with anxious thoughts, when a strange sight suddenly attracted our attention and diverted our solicitude from our own situation.
we perceived a low carriage, fixed on a sledge and drawn by dogs, pass on towards the north, at the distance of half a mile; a being which had the shape of a man, but apparently of gigantic stature, sat in the sledge and guided the dogs.
we watched the rapid progress of the traveller with our telescopes until he was lost among the distant inequalities of the ice.
this appearance excited our unqualified wonder.
we were, as we believed, many hundred miles from any land; but this apparition seemed to denote that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had supposed.
shut in, however, by ice, it was impossible to follow his track, which we had observed with the greatest attention.
about two hours after this occurrence we heard the ground sea, and before night the ice broke and freed our ship.
we, however, lay to until the morning, fearing to encounter in the dark those large loose masses which float about after the breaking up of the ice.
i profited of this time to rest for a few hours.
in the morning, however, as soon as it was light, i went upon deck and found all the sailors busy on one side of the vessel, apparently talking to someone in the sea.
it was, in fact, a sledge, like that we had seen before, which had drifted towards us in the night on a large fragment of ice.
only one dog remained alive; but there was a human being within it whom the sailors were persuading to enter the vessel.
he was not, as the other traveller seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of some undiscovered island, but a european.
when i appeared on deck the master said, here is our captain, and he will not allow you to perish on the open sea.
on perceiving me, the stranger addressed me in english, although with a foreign accent.
before i come on board your vessel, said he, will you have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?
you may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed to me from a man on the brink of destruction and to whom i should have supposed that my vessel would have been a resource which he would not have exchanged for the most precious wealth the earth can afford.
i replied, however, that we were on a voyage of discovery towards the northern pole.
upon hearing this he appeared satisfied and consented to come on board.
good god!
margaret, if you had seen the man who thus capitulated for his safety, your surprise would have been boundless.
his limbs were nearly frozen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and suffering.
i never saw a man in so wretched a condition.
we attempted to carry him into the cabin, but as soon as he had quitted the fresh air he fainted.
we accordingly brought him back to the deck and restored him to animation by rubbing him with brandy and forcing him to swallow a small quantity.
as soon as he showed signs of life we wrapped him up in blankets and placed him near the chimney of the kitchen stove.
by slow degrees he recovered and ate a little soup, which restored him wonderfully.
two days passed in this manner before he was able to speak, and i often feared that his sufferings had deprived him of understanding.
when he had in some measure recovered, i removed him to my own cabin and attended on him as much as my duty would permit.
i never saw a more interesting creature: his eyes have generally an expression of wildness, and even madness, but there are moments when, if anyone performs an act of kindness towards him or does him any the most trifling service, his whole countenance is lighted up, as it were, with a beam of benevolence and sweetness that i never saw equalled.
but he is generally melancholy and despairing, and sometimes he gnashes his teeth, as if impatient of the weight of woes that oppresses him.
when my guest was a little recovered i had great trouble to keep off the men, who wished to ask him a thousand questions; but i would not allow him to be tormented by their idle curiosity, in a state of body and mind whose restoration evidently depended upon entire repose.
once, however, the lieutenant asked why he had come so far upon the ice in so strange a vehicle.
his countenance instantly assumed an aspect of the deepest gloom, and he replied, to seek one who fled from me.
and did the man whom you pursued travel in the same fashion?
yes.
then i fancy we have seen him, for the day before we picked you up we saw some dogs drawing a sledge, with a man in it, across the ice.
this aroused the strangers attention, and he asked a multitude of questions concerning the route which the dmon, as he called him, had pursued.
soon after, when he was alone with me, he said, i have, doubtless, excited your curiosity, as well as that of these good people; but you are too considerate to make inquiries.
certainly; it would indeed be very impertinent and inhuman in me to trouble you with any inquisitiveness of mine.
and yet you rescued me from a strange and perilous situation; you have benevolently restored me to life.
soon after this he inquired if i thought that the breaking up of the ice had destroyed the other sledge.
i replied that i could not answer with any degree of certainty, for the ice had not broken until near midnight, and the traveller might have arrived at a place of safety before that time; but of this i could not judge.
from this time a new spirit of life animated the decaying frame of the stranger.
he manifested the greatest eagerness to be upon deck to watch for the sledge which had before appeared; but i have persuaded him to remain in the cabin, for he is far too weak to sustain the rawness of the atmosphere.
i have promised that someone should watch for him and give him instant notice if any new object should appear in sight.
such is my journal of what relates to this strange occurrence up to the present day.
the stranger has gradually improved in health but is very silent and appears uneasy when anyone except myself enters his cabin.
yet his manners are so conciliating and gentle that the sailors are all interested in him, although they have had very little communication with him.
for my own part, i begin to love him as a brother, and his constant and deep grief fills me with sympathy and compassion.
he must have been a noble creature in his better days, being even now in wreck so attractive and amiable.
i said in one of my letters, my dear margaret, that i should find no friend on the wide ocean; yet i have found a man who, before his spirit had been broken by misery, i should have been happy to have possessed as the brother of my heart.
i shall continue my journal concerning the stranger at intervals, should i have any fresh incidents to record.
august 13th, 17. my affection for my guest increases every day.
he excites at once my admiration and my pity to an astonishing degree.
how can i see so noble a creature destroyed by misery without feeling the most poignant grief?
he is so gentle, yet so wise; his mind is so cultivated, and when he speaks, although his words are culled with the choicest art, yet they flow with rapidity and unparalleled eloquence.
he is now much recovered from his illness and is continually on the deck, apparently watching for the sledge that preceded his own.
yet, although unhappy, he is not so utterly occupied by his own misery but that he interests himself deeply in the projects of others.
he has frequently conversed with me on mine, which i have communicated to him without disguise.
he entered attentively into all my arguments in favour of my eventual success and into every minute detail of the measures i had taken to secure it.
i was easily led by the sympathy which he evinced to use the language of my heart, to give utterance to the burning ardour of my soul and to say, with all the fervour that warmed me, how gladly i would sacrifice my fortune, my existence, my every hope, to the furtherance of my enterprise.
one mans life or death were but a small price to pay for the acquirement of the knowledge which i sought, for the dominion i should acquire and transmit over the elemental foes of our race.
as i spoke, a dark gloom spread over my listeners countenance.
at first i perceived that he tried to suppress his emotion; he placed his hands before his eyes, and my voice quivered and failed me as i beheld tears trickle fast from between his fingers; a groan burst from his heaving breast.
i paused; at length he spoke, in broken accents: unhappy man!
do you share my madness?
have you drunk also of the intoxicating draught?
hear me; let me reveal my tale, and you will dash the cup from your lips!
such words, you may imagine, strongly excited my curiosity; but the paroxysm of grief that had seized the stranger overcame his weakened powers, and many hours of repose and tranquil conversation were necessary to restore his composure.
having conquered the violence of his feelings, he appeared to despise himself for being the slave of passion; and quelling the dark tyranny of despair, he led me again to converse concerning myself personally.
he asked me the history of my earlier years.
the tale was quickly told, but it awakened various trains of reflection.
i spoke of my desire of finding a friend, of my thirst for a more intimate sympathy with a fellow mind than had ever fallen to my lot, and expressed my conviction that a man could boast of little happiness who did not enjoy this blessing.
i agree with you, replied the stranger; we are unfashioned creatures, but half made up, if one wiser, better, dearer than ourselvessuch a friend ought to bedo not lend his aid to perfectionate our weak and faulty natures.
i once had a friend, the most noble of human creatures, and am entitled, therefore, to judge respecting friendship.
you have hope, and the world before you, and have no cause for despair.
but ii have lost everything and cannot begin life anew.
as he said this his countenance became expressive of a calm, settled grief that touched me to the heart.
but he was silent and presently retired to his cabin.
even broken in spirit as he is, no one can feel more deeply than he does the beauties of nature.
the starry sky, the sea, and every sight afforded by these wonderful regions seem still to have the power of elevating his soul from earth.
such a man has a double existence: he may suffer misery and be overwhelmed by disappointments, yet when he has retired into himself, he will be like a celestial spirit that has a halo around him, within whose circle no grief or folly ventures.
will you smile at the enthusiasm i express concerning this divine wanderer?
you would not if you saw him.
you have been tutored and refined by books and retirement from the world, and you are therefore somewhat fastidious; but this only renders you the more fit to appreciate the extraordinary merits of this wonderful man.
sometimes i have endeavoured to discover what quality it is which he possesses that elevates him so immeasurably above any other person i ever knew.
i believe it to be an intuitive discernment, a quick but neverfailing power of judgment, a penetration into the causes of things, unequalled for clearness and precision; add to this a facility of expression and a voice whose varied intonations are soulsubduing music.
august 19th, 17. yesterday the stranger said to me, you may easily perceive, captain walton, that i have suffered great and unparalleled misfortunes.
i had determined at one time that the memory of these evils should die with me, but you have won me to alter my determination.
you seek for knowledge and wisdom, as i once did; and i ardently hope that the gratification of your wishes may not be a serpent to sting you, as mine has been.
i do not know that the relation of my disasters will be useful to you; yet, when i reflect that you are pursuing the same course, exposing yourself to the same dangers which have rendered me what i am, i imagine that you may deduce an apt moral from my tale, one that may direct you if you succeed in your undertaking and console you in case of failure.
prepare to hear of occurrences which are usually deemed marvellous.
were we among the tamer scenes of nature i might fear to encounter your unbelief, perhaps your ridicule; but many things will appear possible in these wild and mysterious regions which would provoke the laughter of those unacquainted with the evervaried powers of nature; nor can i doubt but that my tale conveys in its series internal evidence of the truth of the events of which it is composed.
you may easily imagine that i was much gratified by the offered communication, yet i could not endure that he should renew his grief by a recital of his misfortunes.
i felt the greatest eagerness to hear the promised narrative, partly from curiosity and partly from a strong desire to ameliorate his fate if it were in my power.
i expressed these feelings in my answer.
i thank you, he replied, for your sympathy, but it is useless; my fate is nearly fulfilled.
i wait but for one event, and then i shall repose in peace.
i understand your feeling, continued he, perceiving that i wished to interrupt him; but you are mistaken, my friend, if thus you will allow me to name you; nothing can alter my destiny; listen to my history, and you will perceive how irrevocably it is determined.
he then told me that he would commence his narrative the next day when i should be at leisure.
this promise drew from me the warmest thanks.
i have resolved every night, when i am not imperatively occupied by my duties, to record, as nearly as possible in his own words, what he has related during the day.
if i should be engaged, i will at least make notes.
this manuscript will doubtless afford you the greatest pleasure; but to me, who know him, and who hear it from his own lipswith what interest and sympathy shall i read it in some future day!
even now, as i commence my task, his fulltoned voice swells in my ears; his lustrous eyes dwell on me with all their melancholy sweetness; i see his thin hand raised in animation, while the lineaments of his face are irradiated by the soul within.
strange and harrowing must be his story, frightful the storm which embraced the gallant vessel on its course and wrecked itthus!
chapter 1 i am by birth a genevese, and my family is one of the most distinguished of that republic.
my ancestors had been for many years counsellors and syndics, and my father had filled several public situations with honour and reputation.
he was respected by all who knew him for his integrity and indefatigable attention to public business.
he passed his younger days perpetually occupied by the affairs of his country; a variety of circumstances had prevented his marrying early, nor was it until the decline of life that he became a husband and the father of a family.
as the circumstances of his marriage illustrate his character, i cannot refrain from relating them.
one of his most intimate friends was a merchant who, from a flourishing state, fell, through numerous mischances, into poverty.
this man, whose name was beaufort, was of a proud and unbending disposition and could not bear to live in poverty and oblivion in the same country where he had formerly been distinguished for his rank and magnificence.
having paid his debts, therefore, in the most honourable manner, he retreated with his daughter to the town of lucerne, where he lived unknown and in wretchedness.
my father loved beaufort with the truest friendship and was deeply grieved by his retreat in these unfortunate circumstances.
he bitterly deplored the false pride which led his friend to a conduct so little worthy of the affection that united them.
he lost no time in endeavouring to seek him out, with the hope of persuading him to begin the world again through his credit and assistance.
beaufort had taken effectual measures to conceal himself, and it was ten months before my father discovered his abode.
overjoyed at this discovery, he hastened to the house, which was situated in a mean street near the reuss.
but when he entered, misery and despair alone welcomed him.
beaufort had saved but a very small sum of money from the wreck of his fortunes, but it was sufficient to provide him with sustenance for some months, and in the meantime he hoped to procure some respectable employment in a merchants house.
the interval was, consequently, spent in inaction; his grief only became more deep and rankling when he had leisure for reflection, and at length it took so fast hold of his mind that at the end of three months he lay on a bed of sickness, incapable of any exertion.
his daughter attended him with the greatest tenderness, but she saw with despair that their little fund was rapidly decreasing and that there was no other prospect of support.
but caroline beaufort possessed a mind of an uncommon mould, and her courage rose to support her in her adversity.
she procured plain work; she plaited straw and by various means contrived to earn a pittance scarcely sufficient to support life.
several months passed in this manner.
her father grew worse; her time was more entirely occupied in attending him; her means of subsistence decreased; and in the tenth month her father died in her arms, leaving her an orphan and a beggar.
this last blow overcame her, and she knelt by beauforts coffin weeping bitterly, when my father entered the chamber.
he came like a protecting spirit to the poor girl, who committed herself to his care; and after the interment of his friend he conducted her to geneva and placed her under the protection of a relation.
two years after this event caroline became his wife.
there was a considerable difference between the ages of my parents, but this circumstance seemed to unite them only closer in bonds of devoted affection.
there was a sense of justice in my fathers upright mind which rendered it necessary that he should approve highly to love strongly.
perhaps during former years he had suffered from the latediscovered unworthiness of one beloved and so was disposed to set a greater value on tried worth.
there was a show of gratitude and worship in his attachment to my mother, differing wholly from the doting fondness of age, for it was inspired by reverence for her virtues and a desire to be the means of, in some degree, recompensing her for the sorrows she had endured, but which gave inexpressible grace to his behaviour to her.
everything was made to yield to her wishes and her convenience.
he strove to shelter her, as a fair exotic is sheltered by the gardener, from every rougher wind and to surround her with all that could tend to excite pleasurable emotion in her soft and benevolent mind.
her health, and even the tranquillity of her hitherto constant spirit, had been shaken by what she had gone through.
during the two years that had elapsed previous to their marriage my father had gradually relinquished all his public functions; and immediately after their union they sought the pleasant climate of italy, and the change of scene and interest attendant on a tour through that land of wonders, as a restorative for her weakened frame.
from italy they visited germany and france.
i, their eldest child, was born at naples, and as an infant accompanied them in their rambles.
i remained for several years their only child.
much as they were attached to each other, they seemed to draw inexhaustible stores of affection from a very mine of love to bestow them upon me.
my mothers tender caresses and my fathers smile of benevolent pleasure while regarding me are my first recollections.
i was their plaything and their idol, and something bettertheir child, the innocent and helpless creature bestowed on them by heaven, whom to bring up to good, and whose future lot it was in their hands to direct to happiness or misery, according as they fulfilled their duties towards me.
with this deep consciousness of what they owed towards the being to which they had given life, added to the active spirit of tenderness that animated both, it may be imagined that while during every hour of my infant life i received a lesson of patience, of charity, and of selfcontrol, i was so guided by a silken cord that all seemed but one train of enjoyment to me.
for a long time i was their only care.
my mother had much desired to have a daughter, but i continued their single offspring.
when i was about five years old, while making an excursion beyond the frontiers of italy, they passed a week on the shores of the lake of como.
their benevolent disposition often made them enter the cottages of the poor.
this, to my mother, was more than a duty; it was a necessity, a passionremembering what she had suffered, and how she had been relievedfor her to act in her turn the guardian angel to the afflicted.
during one of their walks a poor cot in the foldings of a vale attracted their notice as being singularly disconsolate, while the number of halfclothed children gathered about it spoke of penury in its worst shape.
one day, when my father had gone by himself to milan, my mother, accompanied by me, visited this abode.
she found a peasant and his wife, hard working, bent down by care and labour, distributing a scanty meal to five hungry babes.
among these there was one which attracted my mother far above all the rest.
she appeared of a different stock.
the four others were darkeyed, hardy little vagrants; this child was thin and very fair.
her hair was the brightest living gold, and despite the poverty of her clothing, seemed to set a crown of distinction on her head.
her brow was clear and ample, her blue eyes cloudless, and her lips and the moulding of her face so expressive of sensibility and sweetness that none could behold her without looking on her as of a distinct species, a being heavensent, and bearing a celestial stamp in all her features.
the peasant woman, perceiving that my mother fixed eyes of wonder and admiration on this lovely girl, eagerly communicated her history.
she was not her child, but the daughter of a milanese nobleman.
her mother was a german and had died on giving her birth.
the infant had been placed with these good people to nurse: they were better off then.
they had not been long married, and their eldest child was but just born.
the father of their charge was one of those italians nursed in the memory of the antique glory of italyone among the schiavi ognor frementi, who exerted himself to obtain the liberty of his country.
he became the victim of its weakness.
whether he had died or still lingered in the dungeons of austria was not known.
his property was confiscated; his child became an orphan and a beggar.
she continued with her foster parents and bloomed in their rude abode, fairer than a garden rose among darkleaved brambles.
when my father returned from milan, he found playing with me in the hall of our villa a child fairer than pictured cheruba creature who seemed to shed radiance from her looks and whose form and motions were lighter than the chamois of the hills.
the apparition was soon explained.
with his permission my mother prevailed on her rustic guardians to yield their charge to her.
they were fond of the sweet orphan.
her presence had seemed a blessing to them, but it would be unfair to her to keep her in poverty and want when providence afforded her such powerful protection.
they consulted their village priest, and the result was that elizabeth lavenza became the inmate of my parents housemy more than sisterthe beautiful and adored companion of all my occupations and my pleasures.
everyone loved elizabeth.
the passionate and almost reverential attachment with which all regarded her became, while i shared it, my pride and my delight.
on the evening previous to her being brought to my home, my mother had said playfully, i have a pretty present for my victortomorrow he shall have it.
and when, on the morrow, she presented elizabeth to me as her promised gift, i, with childish seriousness, interpreted her words literally and looked upon elizabeth as minemine to protect, love, and cherish.
all praises bestowed on her i received as made to a possession of my own.
we called each other familiarly by the name of cousin.
no word, no expression could body forth the kind of relation in which she stood to memy more than sister, since till death she was to be mine only.
chapter 2 we were brought up together; there was not quite a year difference in our ages.
i need not say that we were strangers to any species of disunion or dispute.
harmony was the soul of our companionship, and the diversity and contrast that subsisted in our characters drew us nearer together.
elizabeth was of a calmer and more concentrated disposition; but, with all my ardour, i was capable of a more intense application and was more deeply smitten with the thirst for knowledge.
she busied herself with following the aerial creations of the poets; and in the majestic and wondrous scenes which surrounded our swiss home the sublime shapes of the mountains, the changes of the seasons, tempest and calm, the silence of winter, and the life and turbulence of our alpine summersshe found ample scope for admiration and delight.
while my companion contemplated with a serious and satisfied spirit the magnificent appearances of things, i delighted in investigating their causes.
the world was to me a secret which i desired to divine.
curiosity, earnest research to learn the hidden laws of nature, gladness akin to rapture, as they were unfolded to me, are among the earliest sensations i can remember.
on the birth of a second son, my junior by seven years, my parents gave up entirely their wandering life and fixed themselves in their native country.
we possessed a house in geneva, and a campagne on belrive, the eastern shore of the lake, at the distance of rather more than a league from the city.
we resided principally in the latter, and the lives of my parents were passed in considerable seclusion.
it was my temper to avoid a crowd and to attach myself fervently to a few.
i was indifferent, therefore, to my schoolfellows in general; but i united myself in the bonds of the closest friendship to one among them.
henry clerval was the son of a merchant of geneva.
he was a boy of singular talent and fancy.
he loved enterprise, hardship, and even danger for its own sake.
he was deeply read in books of chivalry and romance.
he composed heroic songs and began to write many a tale of enchantment and knightly adventure.
he tried to make us act plays and to enter into masquerades, in which the characters were drawn from the heroes of roncesvalles, of the round table of king arthur, and the chivalrous train who shed their blood to redeem the holy sepulchre from the hands of the infidels.
no human being could have passed a happier childhood than myself.
my parents were possessed by the very spirit of kindness and indulgence.
we felt that they were not the tyrants to rule our lot according to their caprice, but the agents and creators of all the many delights which we enjoyed.
when i mingled with other families i distinctly discerned how peculiarly fortunate my lot was, and gratitude assisted the development of filial love.
my temper was sometimes violent, and my passions vehement; but by some law in my temperature they were turned not towards childish pursuits but to an eager desire to learn, and not to learn all things indiscriminately.
i confess that neither the structure of languages, nor the code of governments, nor the politics of various states possessed attractions for me.
it was the secrets of heaven and earth that i desired to learn; and whether it was the outward substance of things or the inner spirit of nature and the mysterious soul of man that occupied me, still my inquiries were directed to the metaphysical, or in its highest sense, the physical secrets of the world.
meanwhile clerval occupied himself, so to speak, with the moral relations of things.
the busy stage of life, the virtues of heroes, and the actions of men were his theme; and his hope and his dream was to become one among those whose names are recorded in story as the gallant and adventurous benefactors of our species.
the saintly soul of elizabeth shone like a shrinededicated lamp in our peaceful home.
her sympathy was ours; her smile, her soft voice, the sweet glance of her celestial eyes, were ever there to bless and animate us.
she was the living spirit of love to soften and attract; i might have become sullen in my study, rough through the ardour of my nature, but that she was there to subdue me to a semblance of her own gentleness.
and clervalcould aught ill entrench on the noble spirit of clerval?
yet he might not have been so perfectly humane, so thoughtful in his generosity, so full of kindness and tenderness amidst his passion for adventurous exploit, had she not unfolded to him the real loveliness of beneficence and made the doing good the end and aim of his soaring ambition.
i feel exquisite pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of childhood, before misfortune had tainted my mind and changed its bright visions of extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon self.
besides, in drawing the picture of my early days, i also record those events which led, by insensible steps, to my after tale of misery, for when i would account to myself for the birth of that passion which afterwards ruled my destiny i find it arise, like a mountain river, from ignoble and almost forgotten sources; but, swelling as it proceeded, it became the torrent which, in its course, has swept away all my hopes and joys.
natural philosophy is the genius that has regulated my fate; i desire, therefore, in this narration, to state those facts which led to my predilection for that science.
when i was thirteen years of age we all went on a party of pleasure to the baths near thonon; the inclemency of the weather obliged us to remain a day confined to the inn.
in this house i chanced to find a volume of the works of cornelius agrippa.
i opened it with apathy; the theory which he attempts to demonstrate and the wonderful facts which he relates soon changed this feeling into enthusiasm.
a new light seemed to dawn upon my mind, and bounding with joy, i communicated my discovery to my father.
my father looked carelessly at the title page of my book and said, ah!
cornelius agrippa!
my dear victor, do not waste your time upon this; it is sad trash.
if, instead of this remark, my father had taken the pains to explain to me that the principles of agrippa had been entirely exploded and that a modern system of science had been introduced which possessed much greater powers than the ancient, because the powers of the latter were chimerical, while those of the former were real and practical, under such circumstances i should certainly have thrown agrippa aside and have contented my imagination, warmed as it was, by returning with greater ardour to my former studies.
it is even possible that the train of my ideas would never have received the fatal impulse that led to my ruin.
but the cursory glance my father had taken of my volume by no means assured me that he was acquainted with its contents, and i continued to read with the greatest avidity.
when i returned home my first care was to procure the whole works of this author, and afterwards of paracelsus and albertus magnus.
i read and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they appeared to me treasures known to few besides myself.
i have described myself as always having been imbued with a fervent longing to penetrate the secrets of nature.
in spite of the intense labour and wonderful discoveries of modern philosophers, i always came from my studies discontented and unsatisfied.
sir isaac newton is said to have avowed that he felt like a child picking up shells beside the great and unexplored ocean of truth.
those of his successors in each branch of natural philosophy with whom i was acquainted appeared even to my boys apprehensions as tyros engaged in the same pursuit.
the untaught peasant beheld the elements around him and was acquainted with their practical uses.
the most learned philosopher knew little more.
he had partially unveiled the face of nature, but her immortal lineaments were still a wonder and a mystery.
he might dissect, anatomise, and give names; but, not to speak of a final cause, causes in their secondary and tertiary grades were utterly unknown to him.
i had gazed upon the fortifications and impediments that seemed to keep human beings from entering the citadel of nature, and rashly and ignorantly i had repined.
but here were books, and here were men who had penetrated deeper and knew more.
i took their word for all that they averred, and i became their disciple.
it may appear strange that such should arise in the eighteenth century; but while i followed the routine of education in the schools of geneva, i was, to a great degree, selftaught with regard to my favourite studies.
my father was not scientific, and i was left to struggle with a childs blindness, added to a students thirst for knowledge.
under the guidance of my new preceptors i entered with the greatest diligence into the search of the philosophers stone and the elixir of life; but the latter soon obtained my undivided attention.
wealth was an inferior object, but what glory would attend the discovery if i could banish disease from the human frame and render man invulnerable to any but a violent death!
nor were these my only visions.
the raising of ghosts or devils was a promise liberally accorded by my favourite authors, the fulfilment of which i most eagerly sought; and if my incantations were always unsuccessful, i attributed the failure rather to my own inexperience and mistake than to a want of skill or fidelity in my instructors.
and thus for a time i was occupied by exploded systems, mingling, like an unadept, a thousand contradictory theories and floundering desperately in a very slough of multifarious knowledge, guided by an ardent imagination and childish reasoning, till an accident again changed the current of my ideas.
when i was about fifteen years old we had retired to our house near belrive, when we witnessed a most violent and terrible thunderstorm.
it advanced from behind the mountains of jura, and the thunder burst at once with frightful loudness from various quarters of the heavens.
i remained, while the storm lasted, watching its progress with curiosity and delight.
as i stood at the door, on a sudden i beheld a stream of fire issue from an old and beautiful oak which stood about twenty yards from our house; and so soon as the dazzling light vanished, the oak had disappeared, and nothing remained but a blasted stump.
when we visited it the next morning, we found the tree shattered in a singular manner.
it was not splintered by the shock, but entirely reduced to thin ribbons of wood.
i never beheld anything so utterly destroyed.
before this i was not unacquainted with the more obvious laws of electricity.
on this occasion a man of great research in natural philosophy was with us, and excited by this catastrophe, he entered on the explanation of a theory which he had formed on the subject of electricity and galvanism, which was at once new and astonishing to me.
all that he said threw greatly into the shade cornelius agrippa, albertus magnus, and paracelsus, the lords of my imagination; but by some fatality the overthrow of these men disinclined me to pursue my accustomed studies.
it seemed to me as if nothing would or could ever be known.
all that had so long engaged my attention suddenly grew despicable.
by one of those caprices of the mind which we are perhaps most subject to in early youth, i at once gave up my former occupations, set down natural history and all its progeny as a deformed and abortive creation, and entertained the greatest disdain for a wouldbe science which could never even step within the threshold of real knowledge.
in this mood of mind i betook myself to the mathematics and the branches of study appertaining to that science as being built upon secure foundations, and so worthy of my consideration.
thus strangely are our souls constructed, and by such slight ligaments are we bound to prosperity or ruin.
when i look back, it seems to me as if this almost miraculous change of inclination and will was the immediate suggestion of the guardian angel of my lifethe last effort made by the spirit of preservation to avert the storm that was even then hanging in the stars and ready to envelop me.
her victory was announced by an unusual tranquillity and gladness of soul which followed the relinquishing of my ancient and latterly tormenting studies.
it was thus that i was to be taught to associate evil with their prosecution, happiness with their disregard.
it was a strong effort of the spirit of good, but it was ineffectual.
destiny was too potent, and her immutable laws had decreed my utter and terrible destruction.
chapter 3 when i had attained the age of seventeen my parents resolved that i should become a student at the university of ingolstadt.
i had hitherto attended the schools of geneva, but my father thought it necessary for the completion of my education that i should be made acquainted with other customs than those of my native country.
my departure was therefore fixed at an early date, but before the day resolved upon could arrive, the first misfortune of my life occurredan omen, as it were, of my future misery.
elizabeth had caught the scarlet fever; her illness was severe, and she was in the greatest danger.
during her illness many arguments had been urged to persuade my mother to refrain from attending upon her.
she had at first yielded to our entreaties, but when she heard that the life of her favourite was menaced, she could no longer control her anxiety.
she attended her sickbed; her watchful attentions triumphed over the malignity of the distemperelizabeth was saved, but the consequences of this imprudence were fatal to her preserver.
on the third day my mother sickened; her fever was accompanied by the most alarming symptoms, and the looks of her medical attendants prognosticated the worst event.
on her deathbed the fortitude and benignity of this best of women did not desert her.
she joined the hands of elizabeth and myself.
my children, she said, my firmest hopes of future happiness were placed on the prospect of your union.
this expectation will now be the consolation of your father.
elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place to my younger children.
alas!
i regret that i am taken from you; and, happy and beloved as i have been, is it not hard to quit you all?
but these are not thoughts befitting me; i will endeavour to resign myself cheerfully to death and will indulge a hope of meeting you in another world.
she died calmly, and her countenance expressed affection even in death.
i need not describe the feelings of those whose dearest ties are rent by that most irreparable evil, the void that presents itself to the soul, and the despair that is exhibited on the countenance.
it is so long before the mind can persuade itself that she whom we saw every day and whose very existence appeared a part of our own can have departed for everthat the brightness of a beloved eye can have been extinguished and the sound of a voice so familiar and dear to the ear can be hushed, never more to be heard.
these are the reflections of the first days; but when the lapse of time proves the reality of the evil, then the actual bitterness of grief commences.
yet from whom has not that rude hand rent away some dear connection?
and why should i describe a sorrow which all have felt, and must feel?
the time at length arrives when grief is rather an indulgence than a necessity; and the smile that plays upon the lips, although it may be deemed a sacrilege, is not banished.
my mother was dead, but we had still duties which we ought to perform; we must continue our course with the rest and learn to think ourselves fortunate whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized.
my departure for ingolstadt, which had been deferred by these events, was now again determined upon.
i obtained from my father a respite of some weeks.
it appeared to me sacrilege so soon to leave the repose, akin to death, of the house of mourning and to rush into the thick of life.
i was new to sorrow, but it did not the less alarm me.
i was unwilling to quit the sight of those that remained to me, and above all, i desired to see my sweet elizabeth in some degree consoled.
she indeed veiled her grief and strove to act the comforter to us all.
she looked steadily on life and assumed its duties with courage and zeal.
she devoted herself to those whom she had been taught to call her uncle and cousins.
never was she so enchanting as at this time, when she recalled the sunshine of her smiles and spent them upon us.
she forgot even her own regret in her endeavours to make us forget.
the day of my departure at length arrived.
clerval spent the last evening with us.
he had endeavoured to persuade his father to permit him to accompany me and to become my fellow student, but in vain.
his father was a narrowminded trader and saw idleness and ruin in the aspirations and ambition of his son.
henry deeply felt the misfortune of being debarred from a liberal education.
he said little, but when he spoke i read in his kindling eye and in his animated glance a restrained but firm resolve not to be chained to the miserable details of commerce.
we sat late.
we could not tear ourselves away from each other nor persuade ourselves to say the word farewell!
it was said, and we retired under the pretence of seeking repose, each fancying that the other was deceived; but when at mornings dawn i descended to the carriage which was to convey me away, they were all theremy father again to bless me, clerval to press my hand once more, my elizabeth to renew her entreaties that i would write often and to bestow the last feminine attentions on her playmate and friend.
i threw myself into the chaise that was to convey me away and indulged in the most melancholy reflections.
i, who had ever been surrounded by amiable companions, continually engaged in endeavouring to bestow mutual pleasurei was now alone.
in the university whither i was going i must form my own friends and be my own protector.
my life had hitherto been remarkably secluded and domestic, and this had given me invincible repugnance to new countenances.
i loved my brothers, elizabeth, and clerval; these were old familiar faces, but i believed myself totally unfitted for the company of strangers.
such were my reflections as i commenced my journey; but as i proceeded, my spirits and hopes rose.
i ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge.
i had often, when at home, thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up in one place and had longed to enter the world and take my station among other human beings.
now my desires were complied with, and it would, indeed, have been folly to repent.
i had sufficient leisure for these and many other reflections during my journey to ingolstadt, which was long and fatiguing.
at length the high white steeple of the town met my eyes.
i alighted and was conducted to my solitary apartment to spend the evening as i pleased.
the next morning i delivered my letters of introduction and paid a visit to some of the principal professors.
chanceor rather the evil influence, the angel of destruction, which asserted omnipotent sway over me from the moment i turned my reluctant steps from my fathers doorled me first to m. krempe, professor of natural philosophy.
he was an uncouth man, but deeply imbued in the secrets of his science.
he asked me several questions concerning my progress in the different branches of science appertaining to natural philosophy.
i replied carelessly, and partly in contempt, mentioned the names of my alchemists as the principal authors i had studied.
the professor stared.
have you, he said, really spent your time in studying such nonsense?
i replied in the affirmative.
every minute, continued m. krempe with warmth, every instant that you have wasted on those books is utterly and entirely lost.
you have burdened your memory with exploded systems and useless names.
good god!
in what desert land have you lived, where no one was kind enough to inform you that these fancies which you have so greedily imbibed are a thousand years old and as musty as they are ancient?
i little expected, in this enlightened and scientific age, to find a disciple of albertus magnus and paracelsus.
my dear sir, you must begin your studies entirely anew.
so saying, he stepped aside and wrote down a list of several books treating of natural philosophy which he desired me to procure, and dismissed me after mentioning that in the beginning of the following week he intended to commence a course of lectures upon natural philosophy in its general relations, and that m. waldman, a fellow professor, would lecture upon chemistry the alternate days that he omitted.
i returned home not disappointed, for i have said that i had long considered those authors useless whom the professor reprobated; but i returned not at all the more inclined to recur to these studies in any shape.
m. krempe was a little squat man with a gruff voice and a repulsive countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in favour of his pursuits.
in rather a too philosophical and connected a strain, perhaps, i have given an account of the conclusions i had come to concerning them in my early years.
as a child i had not been content with the results promised by the modern professors of natural science.
with a confusion of ideas only to be accounted for by my extreme youth and my want of a guide on such matters, i had retrod the steps of knowledge along the paths of time and exchanged the discoveries of recent inquirers for the dreams of forgotten alchemists.
besides, i had a contempt for the uses of modern natural philosophy.
it was very different when the masters of the science sought immortality and power; such views, although futile, were grand; but now the scene was changed.
the ambition of the inquirer seemed to limit itself to the annihilation of those visions on which my interest in science was chiefly founded.
i was required to exchange chimeras of boundless grandeur for realities of little worth.
such were my reflections during the first two or three days of my residence at ingolstadt, which were chiefly spent in becoming acquainted with the localities and the principal residents in my new abode.
but as the ensuing week commenced, i thought of the information which m. krempe had given me concerning the lectures.
and although i could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow deliver sentences out of a pulpit, i recollected what he had said of m. waldman, whom i had never seen, as he had hitherto been out of town.
partly from curiosity and partly from idleness, i went into the lecturing room, which m. waldman entered shortly after.
this professor was very unlike his colleague.
he appeared about fifty years of age, but with an aspect expressive of the greatest benevolence; a few grey hairs covered his temples, but those at the back of his head were nearly black.
his person was short but remarkably erect and his voice the sweetest i had ever heard.
he began his lecture by a recapitulation of the history of chemistry and the various improvements made by different men of learning, pronouncing with fervour the names of the most distinguished discoverers.
he then took a cursory view of the present state of the science and explained many of its elementary terms.
after having made a few preparatory experiments, he concluded with a panegyric upon modern chemistry, the terms of which i shall never forget: the ancient teachers of this science, said he, promised impossibilities and performed nothing.
the modern masters promise very little; they know that metals cannot be transmuted and that the elixir of life is a chimera but these philosophers, whose hands seem only made to dabble in dirt, and their eyes to pore over the microscope or crucible, have indeed performed miracles.
they penetrate into the recesses of nature and show how she works in her hidingplaces.
they ascend into the heavens; they have discovered how the blood circulates, and the nature of the air we breathe.
they have acquired new and almost unlimited powers; they can command the thunders of heaven, mimic the earthquake, and even mock the invisible world with its own shadows.
such were the professors wordsrather let me say such the words of the fateenounced to destroy me.
as he went on i felt as if my soul were grappling with a palpable enemy; one by one the various keys were touched which formed the mechanism of my being; chord after chord was sounded, and soon my mind was filled with one thought, one conception, one purpose.
so much has been done, exclaimed the soul of frankensteinmore, far more, will i achieve; treading in the steps already marked, i will pioneer a new way, explore unknown powers, and unfold to the world the deepest mysteries of creation.
i closed not my eyes that night.
my internal being was in a state of insurrection and turmoil; i felt that order would thence arise, but i had no power to produce it.
by degrees, after the mornings dawn, sleep came.
i awoke, and my yesternights thoughts were as a dream.
there only remained a resolution to return to my ancient studies and to devote myself to a science for which i believed myself to possess a natural talent.
on the same day i paid m. waldman a visit.
his manners in private were even more mild and attractive than in public, for there was a certain dignity in his mien during his lecture which in his own house was replaced by the greatest affability and kindness.
i gave him pretty nearly the same account of my former pursuits as i had given to his fellow professor.
he heard with attention the little narration concerning my studies and smiled at the names of cornelius agrippa and paracelsus, but without the contempt that m. krempe had exhibited.
he said that these were men to whose indefatigable zeal modern philosophers were indebted for most of the foundations of their knowledge.
they had left to us, as an easier task, to give new names and arrange in connected classifications the facts which they in a great degree had been the instruments of bringing to light.
the labours of men of genius, however erroneously directed, scarcely ever fail in ultimately turning to the solid advantage of mankind.
i listened to his statement, which was delivered without any presumption or affectation, and then added that his lecture had removed my prejudices against modern chemists; i expressed myself in measured terms, with the modesty and deference due from a youth to his instructor, without letting escape (inexperience in life would have made me ashamed) any of the enthusiasm which stimulated my intended labours.
i requested his advice concerning the books i ought to procure.
i am happy, said m. waldman, to have gained a disciple; and if your application equals your ability, i have no doubt of your success.
chemistry is that branch of natural philosophy in which the greatest improvements have been and may be made; it is on that account that i have made it my peculiar study; but at the same time, i have not neglected the other branches of science.
a man would make but a very sorry chemist if he attended to that department of human knowledge alone.
if your wish is to become really a man of science and not merely a petty experimentalist, i should advise you to apply to every branch of natural philosophy, including mathematics.
he then took me into his laboratory and explained to me the uses of his various machines, instructing me as to what i ought to procure and promising me the use of his own when i should have advanced far enough in the science not to derange their mechanism.
he also gave me the list of books which i had requested, and i took my leave.
thus ended a day memorable to me; it decided my future destiny.
chapter 4 from this day natural philosophy, and particularly chemistry, in the most comprehensive sense of the term, became nearly my sole occupation.
i read with ardour those works, so full of genius and discrimination, which modern inquirers have written on these subjects.
i attended the lectures and cultivated the acquaintance of the men of science of the university, and i found even in m. krempe a great deal of sound sense and real information, combined, it is true, with a repulsive physiognomy and manners, but not on that account the less valuable.
in m. waldman i found a true friend.
his gentleness was never tinged by dogmatism, and his instructions were given with an air of frankness and good nature that banished every idea of pedantry.
in a thousand ways he smoothed for me the path of knowledge and made the most abstruse inquiries clear and facile to my apprehension.
my application was at first fluctuating and uncertain; it gained strength as i proceeded and soon became so ardent and eager that the stars often disappeared in the light of morning whilst i was yet engaged in my laboratory.
as i applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that my progress was rapid.
my ardour was indeed the astonishment of the students, and my proficiency that of the masters.
professor krempe often asked me, with a sly smile, how cornelius agrippa went on, whilst m. waldman expressed the most heartfelt exultation in my progress.
two years passed in this manner, during which i paid no visit to geneva, but was engaged, heart and soul, in the pursuit of some discoveries which i hoped to make.
none but those who have experienced them can conceive of the enticements of science.
in other studies you go as far as others have gone before you, and there is nothing more to know; but in a scientific pursuit there is continual food for discovery and wonder.
a mind of moderate capacity which closely pursues one study must infallibly arrive at great proficiency in that study; and i, who continually sought the attainment of one object of pursuit and was solely wrapped up in this, improved so rapidly that at the end of two years i made some discoveries in the improvement of some chemical instruments, which procured me great esteem and admiration at the university.
when i had arrived at this point and had become as well acquainted with the theory and practice of natural philosophy as depended on the lessons of any of the professors at ingolstadt, my residence there being no longer conducive to my improvements, i thought of returning to my friends and my native town, when an incident happened that protracted my stay.
one of the phenomena which had peculiarly attracted my attention was the structure of the human frame, and, indeed, any animal endued with life.
whence, i often asked myself, did the principle of life proceed?
it was a bold question, and one which has ever been considered as a mystery; yet with how many things are we upon the brink of becoming acquainted, if cowardice or carelessness did not restrain our inquiries.
i revolved these circumstances in my mind and determined thenceforth to apply myself more particularly to those branches of natural philosophy which relate to physiology.
unless i had been animated by an almost supernatural enthusiasm, my application to this study would have been irksome and almost intolerable.
to examine the causes of life, we must first have recourse to death.
i became acquainted with the science of anatomy, but this was not sufficient; i must also observe the natural decay and corruption of the human body.
in my education my father had taken the greatest precautions that my mind should be impressed with no supernatural horrors.
i do not ever remember to have trembled at a tale of superstition or to have feared the apparition of a spirit.
darkness had no effect upon my fancy, and a churchyard was to me merely the receptacle of bodies deprived of life, which, from being the seat of beauty and strength, had become food for the worm.
now i was led to examine the cause and progress of this decay and forced to spend days and nights in vaults and charnelhouses.
my attention was fixed upon every object the most insupportable to the delicacy of the human feelings.
i saw how the fine form of man was degraded and wasted; i beheld the corruption of death succeed to the blooming cheek of life; i saw how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and brain.
i paused, examining and analysing all the minutiae of causation, as exemplified in the change from life to death, and death to life, until from the midst of this darkness a sudden light broke in upon mea light so brilliant and wondrous, yet so simple, that while i became dizzy with the immensity of the prospect which it illustrated, i was surprised that among so many men of genius who had directed their inquiries towards the same science, that i alone should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret.
remember, i am not recording the vision of a madman.
the sun does not more certainly shine in the heavens than that which i now affirm is true.
some miracle might have produced it, yet the stages of the discovery were distinct and probable.
after days and nights of incredible labour and fatigue, i succeeded in discovering the cause of generation and life; nay, more, i became myself capable of bestowing animation upon lifeless matter.
the astonishment which i had at first experienced on this discovery soon gave place to delight and rapture.
after so much time spent in painful labour, to arrive at once at the summit of my desires was the most gratifying consummation of my toils.
but this discovery was so great and overwhelming that all the steps by which i had been progressively led to it were obliterated, and i beheld only the result.
what had been the study and desire of the wisest men since the creation of the world was now within my grasp.
not that, like a magic scene, it all opened upon me at once: the information i had obtained was of a nature rather to direct my endeavours so soon as i should point them towards the object of my search than to exhibit that object already accomplished.
i was like the arabian who had been buried with the dead and found a passage to life, aided only by one glimmering and seemingly ineffectual light.
i see by your eagerness and the wonder and hope which your eyes express, my friend, that you expect to be informed of the secret with which i am acquainted; that cannot be; listen patiently until the end of my story, and you will easily perceive why i am reserved upon that subject.
i will not lead you on, unguarded and ardent as i then was, to your destruction and infallible misery.
learn from me, if not by my precepts, at least by my example, how dangerous is the acquirement of knowledge and how much happier that man is who believes his native town to be the world, than he who aspires to become greater than his nature will allow.
when i found so astonishing a power placed within my hands, i hesitated a long time concerning the manner in which i should employ it.
although i possessed the capacity of bestowing animation, yet to prepare a frame for the reception of it, with all its intricacies of fibres, muscles, and veins, still remained a work of inconceivable difficulty and labour.
i doubted at first whether i should attempt the creation of a being like myself, or one of simpler organization; but my imagination was too much exalted by my first success to permit me to doubt of my ability to give life to an animal as complex and wonderful as man.
the materials at present within my command hardly appeared adequate to so arduous an undertaking, but i doubted not that i should ultimately succeed.
i prepared myself for a multitude of reverses; my operations might be incessantly baffled, and at last my work be imperfect, yet when i considered the improvement which every day takes place in science and mechanics, i was encouraged to hope my present attempts would at least lay the foundations of future success.
nor could i consider the magnitude and complexity of my plan as any argument of its impracticability.
it was with these feelings that i began the creation of a human being.
as the minuteness of the parts formed a great hindrance to my speed, i resolved, contrary to my first intention, to make the being of a gigantic stature, that is to say, about eight feet in height, and proportionably large.
after having formed this determination and having spent some months in successfully collecting and arranging my materials, i began.
no one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore me onwards, like a hurricane, in the first enthusiasm of success.
life and death appeared to me ideal bounds, which i should first break through, and pour a torrent of light into our dark world.
a new species would bless me as its creator and source; many happy and excellent natures would owe their being to me.
no father could claim the gratitude of his child so completely as i should deserve theirs.
pursuing these reflections, i thought that if i could bestow animation upon lifeless matter, i might in process of time (although i now found it impossible) renew life where death had apparently devoted the body to corruption.
these thoughts supported my spirits, while i pursued my undertaking with unremitting ardour.
my cheek had grown pale with study, and my person had become emaciated with confinement.
sometimes, on the very brink of certainty, i failed; yet still i clung to the hope which the next day or the next hour might realise.
one secret which i alone possessed was the hope to which i had dedicated myself; and the moon gazed on my midnight labours, while, with unrelaxed and breathless eagerness, i pursued nature to her hidingplaces.
who shall conceive the horrors of my secret toil as i dabbled among the unhallowed damps of the grave or tortured the living animal to animate the lifeless clay?
my limbs now tremble, and my eyes swim with the remembrance; but then a resistless and almost frantic impulse urged me forward; i seemed to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit.
it was indeed but a passing trance, that only made me feel with renewed acuteness so soon as, the unnatural stimulus ceasing to operate, i had returned to my old habits.
i collected bones from charnelhouses and disturbed, with profane fingers, the tremendous secrets of the human frame.
in a solitary chamber, or rather cell, at the top of the house, and separated from all the other apartments by a gallery and staircase, i kept my workshop of filthy creation; my eyeballs were starting from their sockets in attending to the details of my employment.
the dissecting room and the slaughterhouse furnished many of my materials; and often did my human nature turn with loathing from my occupation, whilst, still urged on by an eagerness which perpetually increased, i brought my work near to a conclusion.
the summer months passed while i was thus engaged, heart and soul, in one pursuit.
it was a most beautiful season; never did the fields bestow a more plentiful harvest or the vines yield a more luxuriant vintage, but my eyes were insensible to the charms of nature.
and the same feelings which made me neglect the scenes around me caused me also to forget those friends who were so many miles absent, and whom i had not seen for so long a time.
i knew my silence disquieted them, and i well remembered the words of my father: i know that while you are pleased with yourself you will think of us with affection, and we shall hear regularly from you.
you must pardon me if i regard any interruption in your correspondence as a proof that your other duties are equally neglected.
i knew well therefore what would be my fathers feelings, but i could not tear my thoughts from my employment, loathsome in itself, but which had taken an irresistible hold of my imagination.
i wished, as it were, to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection until the great object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature, should be completed.
i then thought that my father would be unjust if he ascribed my neglect to vice or faultiness on my part, but i am now convinced that he was justified in conceiving that i should not be altogether free from blame.
a human being in perfection ought always to preserve a calm and peaceful mind and never to allow passion or a transitory desire to disturb his tranquillity.
i do not think that the pursuit of knowledge is an exception to this rule.
if the study to which you apply yourself has a tendency to weaken your affections and to destroy your taste for those simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is certainly unlawful, that is to say, not befitting the human mind.
if this rule were always observed; if no man allowed any pursuit whatsoever to interfere with the tranquillity of his domestic affections, greece had not been enslaved, csar would have spared his country, america would have been discovered more gradually, and the empires of mexico and peru had not been destroyed.
but i forget that i am moralizing in the most interesting part of my tale, and your looks remind me to proceed.
my father made no reproach in his letters and only took notice of my silence by inquiring into my occupations more particularly than before.
winter, spring, and summer passed away during my labours; but i did not watch the blossom or the expanding leavessights which before always yielded me supreme delightso deeply was i engrossed in my occupation.
the leaves of that year had withered before my work drew near to a close, and now every day showed me more plainly how well i had succeeded.
but my enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and i appeared rather like one doomed by slavery to toil in the mines, or any other unwholesome trade than an artist occupied by his favourite employment.
every night i was oppressed by a slow fever, and i became nervous to a most painful degree; the fall of a leaf startled me, and i shunned my fellow creatures as if i had been guilty of a crime.
sometimes i grew alarmed at the wreck i perceived that i had become; the energy of my purpose alone sustained me: my labours would soon end, and i believed that exercise and amusement would then drive away incipient disease; and i promised myself both of these when my creation should be complete.
chapter 5 it was on a dreary night of november that i beheld the accomplishment of my toils.
with an anxiety that almost amounted to agony, i collected the instruments of life around me, that i might infuse a spark of being into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet.
it was already one in the morning; the rain pattered dismally against the panes, and my candle was nearly burnt out, when, by the glimmer of the halfextinguished light, i saw the dull yellow eye of the creature open; it breathed hard, and a convulsive motion agitated its limbs.
how can i describe my emotions at this catastrophe, or how delineate the wretch whom with such infinite pains and care i had endeavoured to form?
his limbs were in proportion, and i had selected his features as beautiful.
beautiful!
great god!
his yellow skin scarcely covered the work of muscles and arteries beneath; his hair was of a lustrous black, and flowing; his teeth of a pearly whiteness; but these luxuriances only formed a more horrid contrast with his watery eyes, that seemed almost of the same colour as the dunwhite sockets in which they were set, his shrivelled complexion and straight black lips.
the different accidents of life are not so changeable as the feelings of human nature.
i had worked hard for nearly two years, for the sole purpose of infusing life into an inanimate body.
for this i had deprived myself of rest and health.
i had desired it with an ardour that far exceeded moderation; but now that i had finished, the beauty of the dream vanished, and breathless horror and disgust filled my heart.
unable to endure the aspect of the being i had created, i rushed out of the room and continued a long time traversing my bedchamber, unable to compose my mind to sleep.
at length lassitude succeeded to the tumult i had before endured, and i threw myself on the bed in my clothes, endeavouring to seek a few moments of forgetfulness.
but it was in vain; i slept, indeed, but i was disturbed by the wildest dreams.
i thought i saw elizabeth, in the bloom of health, walking in the streets of ingolstadt.
delighted and surprised, i embraced her, but as i imprinted the first kiss on her lips, they became livid with the hue of death; her features appeared to change, and i thought that i held the corpse of my dead mother in my arms; a shroud enveloped her form, and i saw the graveworms crawling in the folds of the flannel.
i started from my sleep with horror; a cold dew covered my forehead, my teeth chattered, and every limb became convulsed; when, by the dim and yellow light of the moon, as it forced its way through the window shutters, i beheld the wretchthe miserable monster whom i had created.
he held up the curtain of the bed; and his eyes, if eyes they may be called, were fixed on me.
his jaws opened, and he muttered some inarticulate sounds, while a grin wrinkled his cheeks.
he might have spoken, but i did not hear; one hand was stretched out, seemingly to detain me, but i escaped and rushed downstairs.
i took refuge in the courtyard belonging to the house which i inhabited, where i remained during the rest of the night, walking up and down in the greatest agitation, listening attentively, catching and fearing each sound as if it were to announce the approach of the demoniacal corpse to which i had so miserably given life.
oh!
no mortal could support the horror of that countenance.
a mummy again endued with animation could not be so hideous as that wretch.
i had gazed on him while unfinished; he was ugly then, but when those muscles and joints were rendered capable of motion, it became a thing such as even dante could not have conceived.
i passed the night wretchedly.
sometimes my pulse beat so quickly and hardly that i felt the palpitation of every artery; at others, i nearly sank to the ground through languor and extreme weakness.
mingled with this horror, i felt the bitterness of disappointment; dreams that had been my food and pleasant rest for so long a space were now become a hell to me; and the change was so rapid, the overthrow so complete!
morning, dismal and wet, at length dawned and discovered to my sleepless and aching eyes the church of ingolstadt, its white steeple and clock, which indicated the sixth hour.
the porter opened the gates of the court, which had that night been my asylum, and i issued into the streets, pacing them with quick steps, as if i sought to avoid the wretch whom i feared every turning of the street would present to my view.
i did not dare return to the apartment which i inhabited, but felt impelled to hurry on, although drenched by the rain which poured from a black and comfortless sky.
i continued walking in this manner for some time, endeavouring by bodily exercise to ease the load that weighed upon my mind.
i traversed the streets without any clear conception of where i was or what i was doing.
my heart palpitated in the sickness of fear, and i hurried on with irregular steps, not daring to look about me: like one who, on a lonely road, doth walk in fear and dread, and, having once turned round, walks on, and turns no more his head; because he knows a frightful fiend doth close behind him tread.
coleridges ancient mariner.
continuing thus, i came at length opposite to the inn at which the various diligences and carriages usually stopped.
here i paused, i knew not why; but i remained some minutes with my eyes fixed on a coach that was coming towards me from the other end of the street.
as it drew nearer i observed that it was the swiss diligence; it stopped just where i was standing, and on the door being opened, i perceived henry clerval, who, on seeing me, instantly sprung out.
my dear frankenstein, exclaimed he, how glad i am to see you!
how fortunate that you should be here at the very moment of my alighting!
nothing could equal my delight on seeing clerval; his presence brought back to my thoughts my father, elizabeth, and all those scenes of home so dear to my recollection.
i grasped his hand, and in a moment forgot my horror and misfortune; i felt suddenly, and for the first time during many months, calm and serene joy.
i welcomed my friend, therefore, in the most cordial manner, and we walked towards my college.
clerval continued talking for some time about our mutual friends and his own good fortune in being permitted to come to ingolstadt.
you may easily believe, said he, how great was the difficulty to persuade my father that all necessary knowledge was not comprised in the noble art of bookkeeping; and, indeed, i believe i left him incredulous to the last, for his constant answer to my unwearied entreaties was the same as that of the dutch schoolmaster in the vicar of wakefield: i have ten thousand florins a year without greek, i eat heartily without greek.
but his affection for me at length overcame his dislike of learning, and he has permitted me to undertake a voyage of discovery to the land of knowledge.
it gives me the greatest delight to see you; but tell me how you left my father, brothers, and elizabeth.
very well, and very happy, only a little uneasy that they hear from you so seldom.
by the by, i mean to lecture you a little upon their account myself.
but, my dear frankenstein, continued he, stopping short and gazing full in my face, i did not before remark how very ill you appear; so thin and pale; you look as if you had been watching for several nights.
you have guessed right; i have lately been so deeply engaged in one occupation that i have not allowed myself sufficient rest, as you see; but i hope, i sincerely hope, that all these employments are now at an end and that i am at length free.
i trembled excessively; i could not endure to think of, and far less to allude to, the occurrences of the preceding night.
i walked with a quick pace, and we soon arrived at my college.
i then reflected, and the thought made me shiver, that the creature whom i had left in my apartment might still be there, alive and walking about.
i dreaded to behold this monster, but i feared still more that henry should see him.
entreating him, therefore, to remain a few minutes at the bottom of the stairs, i darted up towards my own room.
my hand was already on the lock of the door before i recollected myself.
i then paused, and a cold shivering came over me.
i threw the door forcibly open, as children are accustomed to do when they expect a spectre to stand in waiting for them on the other side; but nothing appeared.
i stepped fearfully in: the apartment was empty, and my bedroom was also freed from its hideous guest.
i could hardly believe that so great a good fortune could have befallen me, but when i became assured that my enemy had indeed fled, i clapped my hands for joy and ran down to clerval.
we ascended into my room, and the servant presently brought breakfast; but i was unable to contain myself.
it was not joy only that possessed me; i felt my flesh tingle with excess of sensitiveness, and my pulse beat rapidly.
i was unable to remain for a single instant in the same place; i jumped over the chairs, clapped my hands, and laughed aloud.
clerval at first attributed my unusual spirits to joy on his arrival, but when he observed me more attentively, he saw a wildness in my eyes for which he could not account, and my loud, unrestrained, heartless laughter frightened and astonished him.
my dear victor, cried he, what, for gods sake, is the matter?
do not laugh in that manner.
how ill you are!
what is the cause of all this?
do not ask me, cried i, putting my hands before my eyes, for i thought i saw the dreaded spectre glide into the room; he can tell.
oh, save me!
save me!
i imagined that the monster seized me; i struggled furiously and fell down in a fit.
poor clerval!
what must have been his feelings?
a meeting, which he anticipated with such joy, so strangely turned to bitterness.
but i was not the witness of his grief, for i was lifeless and did not recover my senses for a long, long time.
this was the commencement of a nervous fever which confined me for several months.
during all that time henry was my only nurse.
i afterwards learned that, knowing my fathers advanced age and unfitness for so long a journey, and how wretched my sickness would make elizabeth, he spared them this grief by concealing the extent of my disorder.
he knew that i could not have a more kind and attentive nurse than himself; and, firm in the hope he felt of my recovery, he did not doubt that, instead of doing harm, he performed the kindest action that he could towards them.
but i was in reality very ill, and surely nothing but the unbounded and unremitting attentions of my friend could have restored me to life.
the form of the monster on whom i had bestowed existence was for ever before my eyes, and i raved incessantly concerning him.
doubtless my words surprised henry; he at first believed them to be the wanderings of my disturbed imagination, but the pertinacity with which i continually recurred to the same subject persuaded him that my disorder indeed owed its origin to some uncommon and terrible event.
by very slow degrees, and with frequent relapses that alarmed and grieved my friend, i recovered.
i remember the first time i became capable of observing outward objects with any kind of pleasure, i perceived that the fallen leaves had disappeared and that the young buds were shooting forth from the trees that shaded my window.
it was a divine spring, and the season contributed greatly to my convalescence.
i felt also sentiments of joy and affection revive in my bosom; my gloom disappeared, and in a short time i became as cheerful as before i was attacked by the fatal passion.
dearest clerval, exclaimed i, how kind, how very good you are to me.
this whole winter, instead of being spent in study, as you promised yourself, has been consumed in my sick room.
how shall i ever repay you?
i feel the greatest remorse for the disappointment of which i have been the occasion, but you will forgive me.
you will repay me entirely if you do not discompose yourself, but get well as fast as you can; and since you appear in such good spirits, i may speak to you on one subject, may i not?
i trembled.
one subject!
what could it be?
could he allude to an object on whom i dared not even think?
compose yourself, said clerval, who observed my change of colour, i will not mention it if it agitates you; but your father and cousin would be very happy if they received a letter from you in your own handwriting.
they hardly know how ill you have been and are uneasy at your long silence.
is that all, my dear henry?
how could you suppose that my first thought would not fly towards those dear, dear friends whom i love and who are so deserving of my love?
if this is your present temper, my friend, you will perhaps be glad to see a letter that has been lying here some days for you; it is from your cousin, i believe.
chapter 6 clerval then put the following letter into my hands.
it was from my own elizabeth: my dearest cousin, you have been ill, very ill, and even the constant letters of dear kind henry are not sufficient to reassure me on your account.
you are forbidden to writeto hold a pen; yet one word from you, dear victor, is necessary to calm our apprehensions.
for a long time i have thought that each post would bring this line, and my persuasions have restrained my uncle from undertaking a journey to ingolstadt.
i have prevented his encountering the inconveniences and perhaps dangers of so long a journey, yet how often have i regretted not being able to perform it myself!
i figure to myself that the task of attending on your sickbed has devolved on some mercenary old nurse, who could never guess your wishes nor minister to them with the care and affection of your poor cousin.
yet that is over now: clerval writes that indeed you are getting better.
i eagerly hope that you will confirm this intelligence soon in your own handwriting.
get welland return to us.
you will find a happy, cheerful home and friends who love you dearly.
your fathers health is vigorous, and he asks but to see you, but to be assured that you are well; and not a care will ever cloud his benevolent countenance.
how pleased you would be to remark the improvement of our ernest!
he is now sixteen and full of activity and spirit.
he is desirous to be a true swiss and to enter into foreign service, but we cannot part with him, at least until his elder brother returns to us.
my uncle is not pleased with the idea of a military career in a distant country, but ernest never had your powers of application.
he looks upon study as an odious fetter; his time is spent in the open air, climbing the hills or rowing on the lake.
i fear that he will become an idler unless we yield the point and permit him to enter on the profession which he has selected.
little alteration, except the growth of our dear children, has taken place since you left us.
the blue lake and snowclad mountainsthey never change; and i think our placid home and our contented hearts are regulated by the same immutable laws.
my trifling occupations take up my time and amuse me, and i am rewarded for any exertions by seeing none but happy, kind faces around me.
since you left us, but one change has taken place in our little household.
do you remember on what occasion justine moritz entered our family?
probably you do not; i will relate her history, therefore in a few words.
madame moritz, her mother, was a widow with four children, of whom justine was the third.
this girl had always been the favourite of her father, but through a strange perversity, her mother could not endure her, and after the death of m. moritz, treated her very ill. my aunt observed this, and when justine was twelve years of age, prevailed on her mother to allow her to live at our house.
the republican institutions of our country have produced simpler and happier manners than those which prevail in the great monarchies that surround it.
hence there is less distinction between the several classes of its inhabitants; and the lower orders, being neither so poor nor so despised, their manners are more refined and moral.
a servant in geneva does not mean the same thing as a servant in france and england.
justine, thus received in our family, learned the duties of a servant, a condition which, in our fortunate country, does not include the idea of ignorance and a sacrifice of the dignity of a human being.
justine, you may remember, was a great favourite of yours; and i recollect you once remarked that if you were in an ill humour, one glance from justine could dissipate it, for the same reason that ariosto gives concerning the beauty of angelicashe looked so frankhearted and happy.
my aunt conceived a great attachment for her, by which she was induced to give her an education superior to that which she had at first intended.
this benefit was fully repaid; justine was the most grateful little creature in the world: i do not mean that she made any professions i never heard one pass her lips, but you could see by her eyes that she almost adored her protectress.
although her disposition was gay and in many respects inconsiderate, yet she paid the greatest attention to every gesture of my aunt.
she thought her the model of all excellence and endeavoured to imitate her phraseology and manners, so that even now she often reminds me of her.
when my dearest aunt died every one was too much occupied in their own grief to notice poor justine, who had attended her during her illness with the most anxious affection.
poor justine was very ill; but other trials were reserved for her.
one by one, her brothers and sister died; and her mother, with the exception of her neglected daughter, was left childless.
the conscience of the woman was troubled; she began to think that the deaths of her favourites was a judgement from heaven to chastise her partiality.
she was a roman catholic; and i believe her confessor confirmed the idea which she had conceived.
accordingly, a few months after your departure for ingolstadt, justine was called home by her repentant mother.
poor girl!
she wept when she quitted our house; she was much altered since the death of my aunt; grief had given softness and a winning mildness to her manners, which had before been remarkable for vivacity.
nor was her residence at her mothers house of a nature to restore her gaiety.
the poor woman was very vacillating in her repentance.
she sometimes begged justine to forgive her unkindness, but much oftener accused her of having caused the deaths of her brothers and sister.
perpetual fretting at length threw madame moritz into a decline, which at first increased her irritability, but she is now at peace for ever.
she died on the first approach of cold weather, at the beginning of this last winter.
justine has just returned to us; and i assure you i love her tenderly.
she is very clever and gentle, and extremely pretty; as i mentioned before, her mien and her expression continually remind me of my dear aunt.
i must say also a few words to you, my dear cousin, of little darling william.
i wish you could see him; he is very tall of his age, with sweet laughing blue eyes, dark eyelashes, and curling hair.
when he smiles, two little dimples appear on each cheek, which are rosy with health.
he has already had one or two little wives, but louisa biron is his favourite, a pretty little girl of five years of age.
now, dear victor, i dare say you wish to be indulged in a little gossip concerning the good people of geneva.
the pretty miss mansfield has already received the congratulatory visits on her approaching marriage with a young englishman, john melbourne, esq.
her ugly sister, manon, married m. duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn.
your favourite schoolfellow, louis manoir, has suffered several misfortunes since the departure of clerval from geneva.
but he has already recovered his spirits, and is reported to be on the point of marrying a lively pretty frenchwoman, madame tavernier.
she is a widow, and much older than manoir; but she is very much admired, and a favourite with everybody.
i have written myself into better spirits, dear cousin; but my anxiety returns upon me as i conclude.
write, dearest victor,one lineone word will be a blessing to us.
ten thousand thanks to henry for his kindness, his affection, and his many letters; we are sincerely grateful.
adieu!
my cousin; take care of yourself; and, i entreat you, write!
elizabeth lavenza.
geneva, march 18th, 17. dear, dear elizabeth!
i exclaimed, when i had read her letter: i will write instantly and relieve them from the anxiety they must feel.
i wrote, and this exertion greatly fatigued me; but my convalescence had commenced, and proceeded regularly.
in another fortnight i was able to leave my chamber.
one of my first duties on my recovery was to introduce clerval to the several professors of the university.
in doing this, i underwent a kind of rough usage, ill befitting the wounds that my mind had sustained.
ever since the fatal night, the end of my labours, and the beginning of my misfortunes, i had conceived a violent antipathy even to the name of natural philosophy.
when i was otherwise quite restored to health, the sight of a chemical instrument would renew all the agony of my nervous symptoms.
henry saw this, and had removed all my apparatus from my view.
he had also changed my apartment; for he perceived that i had acquired a dislike for the room which had previously been my laboratory.
but these cares of clerval were made of no avail when i visited the professors.
m. waldman inflicted torture when he praised, with kindness and warmth, the astonishing progress i had made in the sciences.
he soon perceived that i disliked the subject; but not guessing the real cause, he attributed my feelings to modesty, and changed the subject from my improvement, to the science itself, with a desire, as i evidently saw, of drawing me out.
what could i do?
he meant to please, and he tormented me.
i felt as if he had placed carefully, one by one, in my view those instruments which were to be afterwards used in putting me to a slow and cruel death.
i writhed under his words, yet dared not exhibit the pain i felt.
clerval, whose eyes and feelings were always quick in discerning the sensations of others, declined the subject, alleging, in excuse, his total ignorance; and the conversation took a more general turn.
i thanked my friend from my heart, but i did not speak.
i saw plainly that he was surprised, but he never attempted to draw my secret from me; and although i loved him with a mixture of affection and reverence that knew no bounds, yet i could never persuade myself to confide in him that event which was so often present to my recollection, but which i feared the detail to another would only impress more deeply.
m. krempe was not equally docile; and in my condition at that time, of almost insupportable sensitiveness, his harsh blunt encomiums gave me even more pain than the benevolent approbation of m. waldman.
dn the fellow!
cried he; why, m. clerval, i assure you he has outstript us all.
ay, stare if you please; but it is nevertheless true.
a youngster who, but a few years ago, believed in cornelius agrippa as firmly as in the gospel, has now set himself at the head of the university; and if he is not soon pulled down, we shall all be out of countenance.ay, ay, continued he, observing my face expressive of suffering, m. frankenstein is modest; an excellent quality in a young man.
young men should be diffident of themselves, you know, m. clerval: i was myself when young; but that wears out in a very short time.
m. krempe had now commenced an eulogy on himself, which happily turned the conversation from a subject that was so annoying to me.
clerval had never sympathised in my tastes for natural science; and his literary pursuits differed wholly from those which had occupied me.
he came to the university with the design of making himself complete master of the oriental languages, and thus he should open a field for the plan of life he had marked out for himself.
resolved to pursue no inglorious career, he turned his eyes toward the east, as affording scope for his spirit of enterprise.
the persian, arabic, and sanskrit languages engaged his attention, and i was easily induced to enter on the same studies.
idleness had ever been irksome to me, and now that i wished to fly from reflection, and hated my former studies, i felt great relief in being the fellowpupil with my friend, and found not only instruction but consolation in the works of the orientalists.
i did not, like him, attempt a critical knowledge of their dialects, for i did not contemplate making any other use of them than temporary amusement.
i read merely to understand their meaning, and they well repaid my labours.
their melancholy is soothing, and their joy elevating, to a degree i never experienced in studying the authors of any other country.
when you read their writings, life appears to consist in a warm sun and a garden of roses,in the smiles and frowns of a fair enemy, and the fire that consumes your own heart.
how different from the manly and heroical poetry of greece and rome!
summer passed away in these occupations, and my return to geneva was fixed for the latter end of autumn; but being delayed by several accidents, winter and snow arrived, the roads were deemed impassable, and my journey was retarded until the ensuing spring.
i felt this delay very bitterly; for i longed to see my native town and my beloved friends.
my return had only been delayed so long, from an unwillingness to leave clerval in a strange place, before he had become acquainted with any of its inhabitants.
the winter, however, was spent cheerfully; and although the spring was uncommonly late, when it came its beauty compensated for its dilatoriness.
the month of may had already commenced, and i expected the letter daily which was to fix the date of my departure, when henry proposed a pedestrian tour in the environs of ingolstadt, that i might bid a personal farewell to the country i had so long inhabited.
i acceded with pleasure to this proposition: i was fond of exercise, and clerval had always been my favourite companion in the ramble of this nature that i had taken among the scenes of my native country.
we passed a fortnight in these perambulations: my health and spirits had long been restored, and they gained additional strength from the salubrious air i breathed, the natural incidents of our progress, and the conversation of my friend.
study had before secluded me from the intercourse of my fellowcreatures, and rendered me unsocial; but clerval called forth the better feelings of my heart; he again taught me to love the aspect of nature, and the cheerful faces of children.
excellent friend!
how sincerely you did love me, and endeavour to elevate my mind until it was on a level with your own.
a selfish pursuit had cramped and narrowed me, until your gentleness and affection warmed and opened my senses; i became the same happy creature who, a few years ago, loved and beloved by all, had no sorrow or care.
when happy, inanimate nature had the power of bestowing on me the most delightful sensations.
a serene sky and verdant fields filled me with ecstasy.
the present season was indeed divine; the flowers of spring bloomed in the hedges, while those of summer were already in bud.
i was undisturbed by thoughts which during the preceding year had pressed upon me, notwithstanding my endeavours to throw them off, with an invincible burden.
henry rejoiced in my gaiety, and sincerely sympathised in my feelings: he exerted himself to amuse me, while he expressed the sensations that filled his soul.
the resources of his mind on this occasion were truly astonishing: his conversation was full of imagination; and very often, in imitation of the persian and arabic writers, he invented tales of wonderful fancy and passion.
at other times he repeated my favourite poems, or drew me out into arguments, which he supported with great ingenuity.
we returned to our college on a sunday afternoon: the peasants were dancing, and every one we met appeared gay and happy.
my own spirits were high, and i bounded along with feelings of unbridled joy and hilarity.
chapter 7 on my return, i found the following letter from my father: my dear victor, you have probably waited impatiently for a letter to fix the date of your return to us; and i was at first tempted to write only a few lines, merely mentioning the day on which i should expect you.
but that would be a cruel kindness, and i dare not do it.
what would be your surprise, my son, when you expected a happy and glad welcome, to behold, on the contrary, tears and wretchedness?
and how, victor, can i relate our misfortune?
absence cannot have rendered you callous to our joys and griefs; and how shall i inflict pain on my long absent son?
i wish to prepare you for the woeful news, but i know it is impossible; even now your eye skims over the page to seek the words which are to convey to you the horrible tidings.
william is dead!that sweet child, whose smiles delighted and warmed my heart, who was so gentle, yet so gay!
victor, he is murdered!
i will not attempt to console you; but will simply relate the circumstances of the transaction.
last thursday (may 7th), i, my niece, and your two brothers, went to walk in plainpalais.
the evening was warm and serene, and we prolonged our walk farther than usual.
it was already dusk before we thought of returning; and then we discovered that william and ernest, who had gone on before, were not to be found.
we accordingly rested on a seat until they should return.
presently ernest came, and enquired if we had seen his brother; he said, that he had been playing with him, that william had run away to hide himself, and that he vainly sought for him, and afterwards waited for a long time, but that he did not return.
this account rather alarmed us, and we continued to search for him until night fell, when elizabeth conjectured that he might have returned to the house.
he was not there.
we returned again, with torches; for i could not rest, when i thought that my sweet boy had lost himself, and was exposed to all the damps and dews of night; elizabeth also suffered extreme anguish.
about five in the morning i discovered my lovely boy, whom the night before i had seen blooming and active in health, stretched on the grass livid and motionless; the print of the murders finger was on his neck.
he was conveyed home, and the anguish that was visible in my countenance betrayed the secret to elizabeth.
she was very earnest to see the corpse.
at first i attempted to prevent her but she persisted, and entering the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the victim, and clasping her hands exclaimed, o god!
i have murdered my darling child!
she fainted, and was restored with extreme difficulty.
when she again lived, it was only to weep and sigh.
she told me, that that same evening william had teased her to let him wear a very valuable miniature that she possessed of your mother.
this picture is gone, and was doubtless the temptation which urged the murderer to the deed.
we have no trace of him at present, although our exertions to discover him are unremitted; but they will not restore my beloved william!
come, dearest victor; you alone can console elizabeth.
she weeps continually, and accuses herself unjustly as the cause of his death; her words pierce my heart.
we are all unhappy; but will not that be an additional motive for you, my son, to return and be our comforter?
your dear mother!
alas, victor!
i now say, thank god she did not live to witness the cruel, miserable death of her youngest darling!
come, victor; not brooding thoughts of vengeance against the assassin, but with feelings of peace and gentleness, that will heal, instead of festering, the wounds of our minds.
enter the house of mourning, my friend, but with kindness and affection for those who love you, and not with hatred for your enemies.
your affectionate and afflicted father, alphonse frankenstein.
geneva, may 12th, 17. clerval, who had watched my countenance as i read this letter, was surprised to observe the despair that succeeded the joy i at first expressed on receiving news from my friends.
i threw the letter on the table, and covered my face with my hands.
my dear frankenstein, exclaimed henry, when he perceived me weep with bitterness, are you always to be unhappy?
my dear friend, what has happened?
i motioned him to take up the letter, while i walked up and down the room in the extremest agitation.
tears also gushed from the eyes of clerval, as he read the account of my misfortune.
i can offer you no consolation, my friend, said he; your disaster is irreparable.
what do you intend to do?
to go instantly to geneva: come with me, henry, to order the horses.
during our walk, clerval endeavoured to say a few words of consolation; he could only express his heartfelt sympathy.
poor william!
said he, dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his angel mother!
who that had seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his untimely loss!
to die so miserably; to feel the murderers grasp!
how much more a murdered that could destroy radiant innocence!
poor little fellow!
one only consolation have we; his friends mourn and weep, but he is at rest.
the pang is over, his sufferings are at an end for ever.
a sod covers his gentle form, and he knows no pain.
he can no longer be a subject for pity; we must reserve that for his miserable survivors.
clerval spoke thus as we hurried through the streets; the words impressed themselves on my mind and i remembered them afterwards in solitude.
but now, as soon as the horses arrived, i hurried into a cabriolet, and bade farewell to my friend.
my journey was very melancholy.
at first i wished to hurry on, for i longed to console and sympathise with my loved and sorrowing friends; but when i drew near my native town, i slackened my progress.
i could hardly sustain the multitude of feelings that crowded into my mind.
i passed through scenes familiar to my youth, but which i had not seen for nearly six years.
how altered every thing might be during that time!
one sudden and desolating change had taken place; but a thousand little circumstances might have by degrees worked other alterations, which, although they were done more tranquilly, might not be the less decisive.
fear overcame me; i dared no advance, dreading a thousand nameless evils that made me tremble, although i was unable to define them.
i remained two days at lausanne, in this painful state of mind.
i contemplated the lake: the waters were placid; all around was calm; and the snowy mountains, the palaces of nature, were not changed.
by degrees the calm and heavenly scene restored me, and i continued my journey towards geneva.
the road ran by the side of the lake, which became narrower as i approached my native town.
i discovered more distinctly the black sides of jura, and the bright summit of mont blanc.
i wept like a child.
dear mountains!
my own beautiful lake!
how do you welcome your wanderer?
your summits are clear; the sky and lake are blue and placid.
is this to prognosticate peace, or to mock at my unhappiness?
i fear, my friend, that i shall render myself tedious by dwelling on these preliminary circumstances; but they were days of comparative happiness, and i think of them with pleasure.
my country, my beloved country!
who but a native can tell the delight i took in again beholding thy streams, thy mountains, and, more than all, thy lovely lake!
yet, as i drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame me.
night also closed around; and when i could hardly see the dark mountains, i felt still more gloomily.
the picture appeared a vast and dim scene of evil, and i foresaw obscurely that i was destined to become the most wretched of human beings.
alas!
i prophesied truly, and failed only in one single circumstance, that in all the misery i imagined and dreaded, i did not conceive the hundredth part of the anguish i was destined to endure.
it was completely dark when i arrived in the environs of geneva; the gates of the town were already shut; and i was obliged to pass the night at secheron, a village at the distance of half a league from the city.
the sky was serene; and, as i was unable to rest, i resolved to visit the spot where my poor william had been murdered.
as i could not pass through the town, i was obliged to cross the lake in a boat to arrive at plainpalais.
during this short voyage i saw the lightning playing on the summit of mont blanc in the most beautiful figures.
the storm appeared to approach rapidly, and, on landing, i ascended a low hill, that i might observe its progress.
it advanced; the heavens were clouded, and i soon felt the rain coming slowly in large drops, but its violence quickly increased.
i quitted my seat, and walked on, although the darkness and storm increased every minute, and the thunder burst with a terrific crash over my head.
it was echoed from salve, the juras, and the alps of savoy; vivid flashes of lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the lake, making it appear like a vast sheet of fire; then for an instant every thing seemed of a pitchy darkness, until the eye recovered itself from the preceding flash.
the storm, as is often the case in switzerland, appeared at once in various parts of the heavens.
the most violent storm hung exactly north of the town, over the part of the lake which lies between the promontory of belrive and the village of copt.
another storm enlightened jura with faint flashes; and another darkened and sometimes disclosed the mle, a peaked mountain to the east of the lake.
while i watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, i wandered on with a hasty step.
this noble war in the sky elevated my spirits; i clasped my hands, and exclaimed aloud, william, dear angel!
this is thy funeral, this thy dirge!
as i said these words, i perceived in the gloom a figure which stole from behind a clump of trees near me; i stood fixed, gazing intently: i could not be mistaken.
a flash of lightning illuminated the object, and discovered its shape plainly to me; its gigantic stature, and the deformity of its aspect more hideous than belongs to humanity, instantly informed me that it was the wretch, the filthy dmon, to whom i had given life.
what did he there?
could he be (i shuddered at the conception) the murderer of my brother?
no sooner did that idea cross my imagination, than i became convinced of its truth; my teeth chattered, and i was forced to lean against a tree for support.
the figure passed me quickly, and i lost it in the gloom.
nothing in human shape could have destroyed the fair child.
he was the murderer!
i could not doubt it.
the mere presence of the idea was an irresistible proof of the fact.
i thought of pursuing the devil; but it would have been in vain, for another flash discovered him to me hanging among the rocks of the nearly perpendicular ascent of mont salve, a hill that bounds plainpalais on the south.
he soon reached the summit, and disappeared.
i remained motionless.
the thunder ceased; but the rain still continued, and the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness.
i revolved in my mind the events which i had until now sought to forget: the whole train of my progress toward the creation; the appearance of the works of my own hands at my bedside; its departure.
two years had now nearly elapsed since the night on which he first received life; and was this his first crime?
alas!
i had turned loose into the world a depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had he not murdered my brother?
no one can conceive the anguish i suffered during the remainder of the night, which i spent, cold and wet, in the open air.
but i did not feel the inconvenience of the weather; my imagination was busy in scenes of evil and despair.
i considered the being whom i had cast among mankind, and endowed with the will and power to effect purposes of horror, such as the deed which he had now done, nearly in the light of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced to destroy all that was dear to me.
day dawned; and i directed my steps towards the town.
the gates were open, and i hastened to my fathers house.
my first thought was to discover what i knew of the murderer, and cause instant pursuit to be made.
but i paused when i reflected on the story that i had to tell.
a being whom i myself had formed, and endued with life, had met me at midnight among the precipices of an inaccessible mountain.
i remembered also the nervous fever with which i had been seized just at the time that i dated my creation, and which would give an air of delirium to a tale otherwise so utterly improbable.
i well knew that if any other had communicated such a relation to me, i should have looked upon it as the ravings of insanity.
besides, the strange nature of the animal would elude all pursuit, even if i were so far credited as to persuade my relatives to commence it.
and then of what use would be pursuit?
who could arrest a creature capable of scaling the overhanging sides of mont salve?
these reflections determined me, and i resolved to remain silent.
it was about five in the morning when i entered my fathers house.
i told the servants not to disturb the family, and went into the library to attend their usual hour of rising.
six years had elapsed, passed in a dream but for one indelible trace, and i stood in the same place where i had last embraced my father before my departure for ingolstadt.
beloved and venerable parent!
he still remained to me.
i gazed on the picture of my mother, which stood over the mantelpiece.
it was an historical subject, painted at my fathers desire, and represented caroline beaufort in an agony of despair, kneeling by the coffin of her dead father.
her garb was rustic, and her cheek pale; but there was an air of dignity and beauty, that hardly permitted the sentiment of pity.
below this picture was a miniature of william; and my tears flowed when i looked upon it.
while i was thus engaged, ernest entered: he had heard me arrive, and hastened to welcome me: welcome, my dearest victor, said he.
ah!
i wish you had come three months ago, and then you would have found us all joyous and delighted.
you come to us now to share a misery which nothing can alleviate; yet your presence will, i hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his misfortune; and your persuasions will induce poor elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting selfaccusations.poor william!
he was our darling and our pride!
tears, unrestrained, fell from my brothers eyes; a sense of mortal agony crept over my frame.
before, i had only imagined the wretchedness of my desolated home; the reality came on me as a new, and a not less terrible, disaster.
i tried to calm ernest; i enquired more minutely concerning my father, and here i named my cousin.
she most of all, said ernest, requires consolation; she accused herself of having caused the death of my brother, and that made her very wretched.
but since the murderer has been discovered the murderer discovered!
good god!
how can that be?
who could attempt to pursue him?
it is impossible; one might as well try to overtake the winds, or confine a mountainstream with a straw.
i saw him too; he was free last night!
i do not know what you mean, replied my brother, in accents of wonder, but to us the discovery we have made completes our misery.
no one would believe it at first; and even now elizabeth will not be convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence.
indeed, who would credit that justine moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all the family, could suddenly become so capable of so frightful, so appalling a crime?
justine moritz!
poor, poor girl, is she the accused?
but it is wrongfully; every one knows that; no one believes it, surely, ernest?
no one did at first; but several circumstances came out, that have almost forced conviction upon us; and her own behaviour has been so confused, as to add to the evidence of facts a weight that, i fear, leaves no hope for doubt.
but she will be tried today, and you will then hear all.
he then related that, the morning on which the murder of poor william had been discovered, justine had been taken ill, and confined to her bed for several days.
during this interval, one of the servants, happening to examine the apparel she had worn on the night of the murder, had discovered in her pocket the picture of my mother, which had been judged to be the temptation of the murderer.
the servant instantly showed it to one of the others, who, without saying a word to any of the family, went to a magistrate; and, upon their deposition, justine was apprehended.
on being charged with the fact, the poor girl confirmed the suspicion in a great measure by her extreme confusion of manner.
this was a strange tale, but it did not shake my faith; and i replied earnestly, you are all mistaken; i know the murderer.
justine, poor, good justine, is innocent.
at that instant my father entered.
i saw unhappiness deeply impressed on his countenance, but he endeavoured to welcome me cheerfully; and, after we had exchanged our mournful greeting, would have introduced some other topic than that of our disaster, had not ernest exclaimed, good god, papa!
victor says that he knows who was the murderer of poor william.
we do also, unfortunately, replied my father, for indeed i had rather have been for ever ignorant than have discovered so much depravity and ungratitude in one i valued so highly.
my dear father, you are mistaken; justine is innocent.
if she is, god forbid that she should suffer as guilty.
she is to be tried today, and i hope, i sincerely hope, that she will be acquitted.
this speech calmed me.
i was firmly convinced in my own mind that justine, and indeed every human being, was guiltless of this murder.
i had no fear, therefore, that any circumstantial evidence could be brought forward strong enough to convict her.
my tale was not one to announce publicly; its astounding horror would be looked upon as madness by the vulgar.
did any one indeed exist, except i, the creator, who would believe, unless his senses convinced him, in the existence of the living monument of presumption and rash ignorance which i had let loose upon the world?
we were soon joined by elizabeth.
time had altered her since i last beheld her; it had endowed her with loveliness surpassing the beauty of her childish years.
there was the same candour, the same vivacity, but it was allied to an expression more full of sensibility and intellect.
she welcomed me with the greatest affection.
your arrival, my dear cousin, said she, fills me with hope.
you perhaps will find some means to justify my poor guiltless justine.
alas!
who is safe, if she be convicted of crime?
i rely on her innocence as certainly as i do upon my own.
our misfortune is doubly hard to us; we have not only lost that lovely darling boy, but this poor girl, whom i sincerely love, is to be torn away by even a worse fate.
if she is condemned, i never shall know joy more.
but she will not, i am sure she will not; and then i shall be happy again, even after the sad death of my little william.
she is innocent, my elizabeth, said i, and that shall be proved; fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance of her acquittal.
how kind and generous you are!
every one else believes in her guilt, and that made me wretched, for i knew that it was impossible: and to see every one else prejudiced in so deadly a manner rendered me hopeless and despairing.
she wept.
dearest niece, said my father, dry your tears.
if she is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our laws, and the activity with which i shall prevent the slightest shadow of partiality.
chapter 8 we passed a few sad hours until eleven oclock, when the trial was to commence.
my father and the rest of the family being obliged to attend as witnesses, i accompanied them to the court.
during the whole of this wretched mockery of justice i suffered living torture.
it was to be decided whether the result of my curiosity and lawless devices would cause the death of two of my fellow beings: one a smiling babe full of innocence and joy, the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror.
justine also was a girl of merit and possessed qualities which promised to render her life happy; now all was to be obliterated in an ignominious grave, and i the cause!
a thousand times rather would i have confessed myself guilty of the crime ascribed to justine, but i was absent when it was committed, and such a declaration would have been considered as the ravings of a madman and would not have exculpated her who suffered through me.
the appearance of justine was calm.
she was dressed in mourning, and her countenance, always engaging, was rendered, by the solemnity of her feelings, exquisitely beautiful.
yet she appeared confident in innocence and did not tremble, although gazed on and execrated by thousands, for all the kindness which her beauty might otherwise have excited was obliterated in the minds of the spectators by the imagination of the enormity she was supposed to have committed.
she was tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evidently constrained; and as her confusion had before been adduced as a proof of her guilt, she worked up her mind to an appearance of courage.
when she entered the court she threw her eyes round it and quickly discovered where we were seated.
a tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw us, but she quickly recovered herself, and a look of sorrowful affection seemed to attest her utter guiltlessness.
the trial began, and after the advocate against her had stated the charge, several witnesses were called.
several strange facts combined against her, which might have staggered anyone who had not such proof of her innocence as i had.
she had been out the whole of the night on which the murder had been committed and towards morning had been perceived by a marketwoman not far from the spot where the body of the murdered child had been afterwards found.
the woman asked her what she did there, but she looked very strangely and only returned a confused and unintelligible answer.
she returned to the house about eight oclock, and when one inquired where she had passed the night, she replied that she had been looking for the child and demanded earnestly if anything had been heard concerning him.
when shown the body, she fell into violent hysterics and kept her bed for several days.
the picture was then produced which the servant had found in her pocket; and when elizabeth, in a faltering voice, proved that it was the same which, an hour before the child had been missed, she had placed round his neck, a murmur of horror and indignation filled the court.
justine was called on for her defence.
as the trial had proceeded, her countenance had altered.
surprise, horror, and misery were strongly expressed.
sometimes she struggled with her tears, but when she was desired to plead, she collected her powers and spoke in an audible although variable voice.
god knows, she said, how entirely i am innocent.
but i do not pretend that my protestations should acquit me; i rest my innocence on a plain and simple explanation of the facts which have been adduced against me, and i hope the character i have always borne will incline my judges to a favourable interpretation where any circumstance appears doubtful or suspicious.
she then related that, by the permission of elizabeth, she had passed the evening of the night on which the murder had been committed at the house of an aunt at chne, a village situated at about a league from geneva.
on her return, at about nine oclock, she met a man who asked her if she had seen anything of the child who was lost.
she was alarmed by this account and passed several hours in looking for him, when the gates of geneva were shut, and she was forced to remain several hours of the night in a barn belonging to a cottage, being unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she was well known.
most of the night she spent here watching; towards morning she believed that she slept for a few minutes; some steps disturbed her, and she awoke.
it was dawn, and she quitted her asylum, that she might again endeavour to find my brother.
if she had gone near the spot where his body lay, it was without her knowledge.
that she had been bewildered when questioned by the marketwoman was not surprising, since she had passed a sleepless night and the fate of poor william was yet uncertain.
concerning the picture she could give no account.
i know, continued the unhappy victim, how heavily and fatally this one circumstance weighs against me, but i have no power of explaining it; and when i have expressed my utter ignorance, i am only left to conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been placed in my pocket.
but here also i am checked.
i believe that i have no enemy on earth, and none surely would have been so wicked as to destroy me wantonly.
did the murderer place it there?
i know of no opportunity afforded him for so doing; or, if i had, why should he have stolen the jewel, to part with it again so soon?
i commit my cause to the justice of my judges, yet i see no room for hope.
i beg permission to have a few witnesses examined concerning my character, and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed guilt, i must be condemned, although i would pledge my salvation on my innocence.
several witnesses were called who had known her for many years, and they spoke well of her; but fear and hatred of the crime of which they supposed her guilty rendered them timorous and unwilling to come forward.
elizabeth saw even this last resource, her excellent dispositions and irreproachable conduct, about to fail the accused, when, although violently agitated, she desired permission to address the court.
i am, said she, the cousin of the unhappy child who was murdered, or rather his sister, for i was educated by and have lived with his parents ever since and even long before his birth.
it may therefore be judged indecent in me to come forward on this occasion, but when i see a fellow creature about to perish through the cowardice of her pretended friends, i wish to be allowed to speak, that i may say what i know of her character.
i am well acquainted with the accused.
i have lived in the same house with her, at one time for five and at another for nearly two years.
during all that period she appeared to me the most amiable and benevolent of human creatures.
she nursed madame frankenstein, my aunt, in her last illness, with the greatest affection and care and afterwards attended her own mother during a tedious illness, in a manner that excited the admiration of all who knew her, after which she again lived in my uncles house, where she was beloved by all the family.
she was warmly attached to the child who is now dead and acted towards him like a most affectionate mother.
for my own part, i do not hesitate to say that, notwithstanding all the evidence produced against her, i believe and rely on her perfect innocence.
she had no temptation for such an action; as to the bauble on which the chief proof rests, if she had earnestly desired it, i should have willingly given it to her, so much do i esteem and value her.
a murmur of approbation followed elizabeths simple and powerful appeal, but it was excited by her generous interference, and not in favour of poor justine, on whom the public indignation was turned with renewed violence, charging her with the blackest ingratitude.
she herself wept as elizabeth spoke, but she did not answer.
my own agitation and anguish was extreme during the whole trial.
i believed in her innocence; i knew it.
could the dmon who had (i did not for a minute doubt) murdered my brother also in his hellish sport have betrayed the innocent to death and ignominy?
i could not sustain the horror of my situation, and when i perceived that the popular voice and the countenances of the judges had already condemned my unhappy victim, i rushed out of the court in agony.
the tortures of the accused did not equal mine; she was sustained by innocence, but the fangs of remorse tore my bosom and would not forgo their hold.
i passed a night of unmingled wretchedness.
in the morning i went to the court; my lips and throat were parched.
i dared not ask the fatal question, but i was known, and the officer guessed the cause of my visit.
the ballots had been thrown; they were all black, and justine was condemned.
i cannot pretend to describe what i then felt.
i had before experienced sensations of horror, and i have endeavoured to bestow upon them adequate expressions, but words cannot convey an idea of the heartsickening despair that i then endured.
the person to whom i addressed myself added that justine had already confessed her guilt.
that evidence, he observed, was hardly required in so glaring a case, but i am glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so decisive.
this was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean?
had my eyes deceived me?
and was i really as mad as the whole world would believe me to be if i disclosed the object of my suspicions?
i hastened to return home, and elizabeth eagerly demanded the result.
my cousin, replied i, it is decided as you may have expected; all judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer than that one guilty should escape.
but she has confessed.
this was a dire blow to poor elizabeth, who had relied with firmness upon justines innocence.
alas!
said she.
how shall i ever again believe in human goodness?
justine, whom i loved and esteemed as my sister, how could she put on those smiles of innocence only to betray?
her mild eyes seemed incapable of any severity or guile, and yet she has committed a murder.
soon after we heard that the poor victim had expressed a desire to see my cousin.
my father wished her not to go but said that he left it to her own judgment and feelings to decide.
yes, said elizabeth, i will go, although she is guilty; and you, victor, shall accompany me; i cannot go alone.
the idea of this visit was torture to me, yet i could not refuse.
we entered the gloomy prison chamber and beheld justine sitting on some straw at the farther end; her hands were manacled, and her head rested on her knees.
she rose on seeing us enter, and when we were left alone with her, she threw herself at the feet of elizabeth, weeping bitterly.
my cousin wept also.
oh, justine!
said she.
why did you rob me of my last consolation?
i relied on your innocence, and although i was then very wretched, i was not so miserable as i am now.
and do you also believe that i am so very, very wicked?
do you also join with my enemies to crush me, to condemn me as a murderer?
her voice was suffocated with sobs.
rise, my poor girl, said elizabeth; why do you kneel, if you are innocent?
i am not one of your enemies, i believed you guiltless, notwithstanding every evidence, until i heard that you had yourself declared your guilt.
that report, you say, is false; and be assured, dear justine, that nothing can shake my confidence in you for a moment, but your own confession.
i did confess, but i confessed a lie.
i confessed, that i might obtain absolution; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than all my other sins.
the god of heaven forgive me!
ever since i was condemned, my confessor has besieged me; he threatened and menaced, until i almost began to think that i was the monster that he said i was.
he threatened excommunication and hell fire in my last moments if i continued obdurate.
dear lady, i had none to support me; all looked on me as a wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition.
what could i do?
in an evil hour i subscribed to a lie; and now only am i truly miserable.
she paused, weeping, and then continued, i thought with horror, my sweet lady, that you should believe your justine, whom your blessed aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature capable of a crime which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated.
dear william!
dearest blessed child!
i soon shall see you again in heaven, where we shall all be happy; and that consoles me, going as i am to suffer ignominy and death.
oh, justine!
forgive me for having for one moment distrusted you.
why did you confess?
but do not mourn, dear girl.
do not fear.
i will proclaim, i will prove your innocence.
i will melt the stony hearts of your enemies by my tears and prayers.
you shall not die!
you, my playfellow, my companion, my sister, perish on the scaffold!
no!
no!
i never could survive so horrible a misfortune.
justine shook her head mournfully.
i do not fear to die, she said; that pang is past.
god raises my weakness and gives me courage to endure the worst.
i leave a sad and bitter world; and if you remember me and think of me as of one unjustly condemned, i am resigned to the fate awaiting me.
learn from me, dear lady, to submit in patience to the will of heaven!
during this conversation i had retired to a corner of the prison room, where i could conceal the horrid anguish that possessed me.
despair!
who dared talk of that?
the poor victim, who on the morrow was to pass the awful boundary between life and death, felt not, as i did, such deep and bitter agony.
i gnashed my teeth and ground them together, uttering a groan that came from my inmost soul.
justine started.
when she saw who it was, she approached me and said, dear sir, you are very kind to visit me; you, i hope, do not believe that i am guilty?
i could not answer.
no, justine, said elizabeth; he is more convinced of your innocence than i was, for even when he heard that you had confessed, he did not credit it.
i truly thank him.
in these last moments i feel the sincerest gratitude towards those who think of me with kindness.
how sweet is the affection of others to such a wretch as i am!
it removes more than half my misfortune, and i feel as if i could die in peace now that my innocence is acknowledged by you, dear lady, and your cousin.
thus the poor sufferer tried to comfort others and herself.
she indeed gained the resignation she desired.
but i, the true murderer, felt the neverdying worm alive in my bosom, which allowed of no hope or consolation.
elizabeth also wept and was unhappy, but hers also was the misery of innocence, which, like a cloud that passes over the fair moon, for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness.
anguish and despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; i bore a hell within me which nothing could extinguish.
we stayed several hours with justine, and it was with great difficulty that elizabeth could tear herself away.
i wish, cried she, that i were to die with you; i cannot live in this world of misery.
justine assumed an air of cheerfulness, while she with difficulty repressed her bitter tears.
she embraced elizabeth and said in a voice of halfsuppressed emotion, farewell, sweet lady, dearest elizabeth, my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and preserve you; may this be the last misfortune that you will ever suffer!
live, and be happy, and make others so.
and on the morrow justine died.
elizabeths heartrending eloquence failed to move the judges from their settled conviction in the criminality of the saintly sufferer.
my passionate and indignant appeals were lost upon them.
and when i received their cold answers and heard the harsh, unfeeling reasoning of these men, my purposed avowal died away on my lips.
thus i might proclaim myself a madman, but not revoke the sentence passed upon my wretched victim.
she perished on the scaffold as a murderess!
from the tortures of my own heart, i turned to contemplate the deep and voiceless grief of my elizabeth.
this also was my doing!
and my fathers woe, and the desolation of that late so smiling home all was the work of my thriceaccursed hands!
ye weep, unhappy ones, but these are not your last tears!
again shall you raise the funeral wail, and the sound of your lamentations shall again and again be heard!
frankenstein, your son, your kinsman, your early, muchloved friend; he who would spend each vital drop of blood for your sakes, who has no thought nor sense of joy except as it is mirrored also in your dear countenances, who would fill the air with blessings and spend his life in serving youhe bids you weep, to shed countless tears; happy beyond his hopes, if thus inexorable fate be satisfied, and if the destruction pause before the peace of the grave have succeeded to your sad torments!
thus spoke my prophetic soul, as, torn by remorse, horror, and despair, i beheld those i loved spend vain sorrow upon the graves of william and justine, the first hapless victims to my unhallowed arts.
chapter 9 nothing is more painful to the human mind than, after the feelings have been worked up by a quick succession of events, the dead calmness of inaction and certainty which follows and deprives the soul both of hope and fear.
justine died, she rested, and i was alive.
the blood flowed freely in my veins, but a weight of despair and remorse pressed on my heart which nothing could remove.
sleep fled from my eyes; i wandered like an evil spirit, for i had committed deeds of mischief beyond description horrible, and more, much more (i persuaded myself) was yet behind.
yet my heart overflowed with kindness and the love of virtue.
i had begun life with benevolent intentions and thirsted for the moment when i should put them in practice and make myself useful to my fellow beings.
now all was blasted; instead of that serenity of conscience which allowed me to look back upon the past with selfsatisfaction, and from thence to gather promise of new hopes, i was seized by remorse and the sense of guilt, which hurried me away to a hell of intense tortures such as no language can describe.
this state of mind preyed upon my health, which had perhaps never entirely recovered from the first shock it had sustained.
i shunned the face of man; all sound of joy or complacency was torture to me; solitude was my only consolationdeep, dark, deathlike solitude.
my father observed with pain the alteration perceptible in my disposition and habits and endeavoured by arguments deduced from the feelings of his serene conscience and guiltless life to inspire me with fortitude and awaken in me the courage to dispel the dark cloud which brooded over me.
do you think, victor, said he, that i do not suffer also?
no one could love a child more than i loved your brothertears came into his eyes as he spokebut is it not a duty to the survivors that we should refrain from augmenting their unhappiness by an appearance of immoderate grief?
it is also a duty owed to yourself, for excessive sorrow prevents improvement or enjoyment, or even the discharge of daily usefulness, without which no man is fit for society.
this advice, although good, was totally inapplicable to my case; i should have been the first to hide my grief and console my friends if remorse had not mingled its bitterness, and terror its alarm, with my other sensations.
now i could only answer my father with a look of despair and endeavour to hide myself from his view.
about this time we retired to our house at belrive.
this change was particularly agreeable to me.
the shutting of the gates regularly at ten oclock and the impossibility of remaining on the lake after that hour had rendered our residence within the walls of geneva very irksome to me.
i was now free.
often, after the rest of the family had retired for the night, i took the boat and passed many hours upon the water.
sometimes, with my sails set, i was carried by the wind; and sometimes, after rowing into the middle of the lake, i left the boat to pursue its own course and gave way to my own miserable reflections.
i was often tempted, when all was at peace around me, and i the only unquiet thing that wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and heavenlyif i except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and interrupted croaking was heard only when i approached the shoreoften, i say, i was tempted to plunge into the silent lake, that the waters might close over me and my calamities for ever.
but i was restrained, when i thought of the heroic and suffering elizabeth, whom i tenderly loved, and whose existence was bound up in mine.
i thought also of my father and surviving brother; should i by my base desertion leave them exposed and unprotected to the malice of the fiend whom i had let loose among them?
at these moments i wept bitterly and wished that peace would revisit my mind only that i might afford them consolation and happiness.
but that could not be.
remorse extinguished every hope.
i had been the author of unalterable evils, and i lived in daily fear lest the monster whom i had created should perpetrate some new wickedness.
i had an obscure feeling that all was not over and that he would still commit some signal crime, which by its enormity should almost efface the recollection of the past.
there was always scope for fear so long as anything i loved remained behind.
my abhorrence of this fiend cannot be conceived.
when i thought of him i gnashed my teeth, my eyes became inflamed, and i ardently wished to extinguish that life which i had so thoughtlessly bestowed.
when i reflected on his crimes and malice, my hatred and revenge burst all bounds of moderation.
i would have made a pilgrimage to the highest peak of the andes, could i, when there, have precipitated him to their base.
i wished to see him again, that i might wreak the utmost extent of abhorrence on his head and avenge the deaths of william and justine.
our house was the house of mourning.
my fathers health was deeply shaken by the horror of the recent events.
elizabeth was sad and desponding; she no longer took delight in her ordinary occupations; all pleasure seemed to her sacrilege toward the dead; eternal woe and tears she then thought was the just tribute she should pay to innocence so blasted and destroyed.
she was no longer that happy creature who in earlier youth wandered with me on the banks of the lake and talked with ecstasy of our future prospects.
the first of those sorrows which are sent to wean us from the earth had visited her, and its dimming influence quenched her dearest smiles.
when i reflect, my dear cousin, said she, on the miserable death of justine moritz, i no longer see the world and its works as they before appeared to me.
before, i looked upon the accounts of vice and injustice that i read in books or heard from others as tales of ancient days or imaginary evils; at least they were remote and more familiar to reason than to the imagination; but now misery has come home, and men appear to me as monsters thirsting for each others blood.
yet i am certainly unjust.
everybody believed that poor girl to be guilty; and if she could have committed the crime for which she suffered, assuredly she would have been the most depraved of human creatures.
for the sake of a few jewels, to have murdered the son of her benefactor and friend, a child whom she had nursed from its birth, and appeared to love as if it had been her own!
i could not consent to the death of any human being, but certainly i should have thought such a creature unfit to remain in the society of men.
but she was innocent.
i know, i feel she was innocent; you are of the same opinion, and that confirms me.
alas!
victor, when falsehood can look so like the truth, who can assure themselves of certain happiness?
i feel as if i were walking on the edge of a precipice, towards which thousands are crowding and endeavouring to plunge me into the abyss.
william and justine were assassinated, and the murderer escapes; he walks about the world free, and perhaps respected.
but even if i were condemned to suffer on the scaffold for the same crimes, i would not change places with such a wretch.
i listened to this discourse with the extremest agony.
i, not in deed, but in effect, was the true murderer.
elizabeth read my anguish in my countenance, and kindly taking my hand, said, my dearest friend, you must calm yourself.
these events have affected me, god knows how deeply; but i am not so wretched as you are.
there is an expression of despair, and sometimes of revenge, in your countenance that makes me tremble.
dear victor, banish these dark passions.
remember the friends around you, who centre all their hopes in you.
have we lost the power of rendering you happy?
ah!
while we love, while we are true to each other, here in this land of peace and beauty, your native country, we may reap every tranquil blessingwhat can disturb our peace?
and could not such words from her whom i fondly prized before every other gift of fortune suffice to chase away the fiend that lurked in my heart?
even as she spoke i drew near to her, as if in terror, lest at that very moment the destroyer had been near to rob me of her.
thus not the tenderness of friendship, nor the beauty of earth, nor of heaven, could redeem my soul from woe; the very accents of love were ineffectual.
i was encompassed by a cloud which no beneficial influence could penetrate.
the wounded deer dragging its fainting limbs to some untrodden brake, there to gaze upon the arrow which had pierced it, and to die, was but a type of me.
sometimes i could cope with the sullen despair that overwhelmed me, but sometimes the whirlwind passions of my soul drove me to seek, by bodily exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable sensations.
it was during an access of this kind that i suddenly left my home, and bending my steps towards the near alpine valleys, sought in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and my ephemeral, because human, sorrows.
my wanderings were directed towards the valley of chamounix.
i had visited it frequently during my boyhood.
six years had passed since then: i was a wreck, but nought had changed in those savage and enduring scenes.
i performed the first part of my journey on horseback.
i afterwards hired a mule, as the more surefooted and least liable to receive injury on these rugged roads.
the weather was fine; it was about the middle of the month of august, nearly two months after the death of justine, that miserable epoch from which i dated all my woe.
the weight upon my spirit was sensibly lightened as i plunged yet deeper in the ravine of arve.
the immense mountains and precipices that overhung me on every side, the sound of the river raging among the rocks, and the dashing of the waterfalls around spoke of a power mighty as omnipotenceand i ceased to fear or to bend before any being less almighty than that which had created and ruled the elements, here displayed in their most terrific guise.
still, as i ascended higher, the valley assumed a more magnificent and astonishing character.
ruined castles hanging on the precipices of piny mountains, the impetuous arve, and cottages every here and there peeping forth from among the trees formed a scene of singular beauty.
but it was augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty alps, whose white and shining pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to another earth, the habitations of another race of beings.
i passed the bridge of plissier, where the ravine, which the river forms, opened before me, and i began to ascend the mountain that overhangs it.
soon after, i entered the valley of chamounix.
this valley is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and picturesque as that of servox, through which i had just passed.
the high and snowy mountains were its immediate boundaries, but i saw no more ruined castles and fertile fields.
immense glaciers approached the road; i heard the rumbling thunder of the falling avalanche and marked the smoke of its passage.
mont blanc, the supreme and magnificent mont blanc, raised itself from the surrounding aiguilles, and its tremendous dme overlooked the valley.
a tingling longlost sense of pleasure often came across me during this journey.
some turn in the road, some new object suddenly perceived and recognised, reminded me of days gone by, and were associated with the lighthearted gaiety of boyhood.
the very winds whispered in soothing accents, and maternal nature bade me weep no more.
then again the kindly influence ceased to acti found myself fettered again to grief and indulging in all the misery of reflection.
then i spurred on my animal, striving so to forget the world, my fears, and more than all, myselfor, in a more desperate fashion, i alighted and threw myself on the grass, weighed down by horror and despair.
at length i arrived at the village of chamounix.
exhaustion succeeded to the extreme fatigue both of body and of mind which i had endured.
for a short space of time i remained at the window watching the pallid lightnings that played above mont blanc and listening to the rushing of the arve, which pursued its noisy way beneath.
the same lulling sounds acted as a lullaby to my too keen sensations; when i placed my head upon my pillow, sleep crept over me; i felt it as it came and blessed the giver of oblivion.
chapter 10 i spent the following day roaming through the valley.
i stood beside the sources of the arveiron, which take their rise in a glacier, that with slow pace is advancing down from the summit of the hills to barricade the valley.
the abrupt sides of vast mountains were before me; the icy wall of the glacier overhung me; a few shattered pines were scattered around; and the solemn silence of this glorious presencechamber of imperial nature was broken only by the brawling waves or the fall of some vast fragment, the thunder sound of the avalanche or the cracking, reverberated along the mountains, of the accumulated ice, which, through the silent working of immutable laws, was ever and anon rent and torn, as if it had been but a plaything in their hands.
these sublime and magnificent scenes afforded me the greatest consolation that i was capable of receiving.
they elevated me from all littleness of feeling, and although they did not remove my grief, they subdued and tranquillised it.
in some degree, also, they diverted my mind from the thoughts over which it had brooded for the last month.
i retired to rest at night; my slumbers, as it were, waited on and ministered to by the assemblance of grand shapes which i had contemplated during the day.
they congregated round me; the unstained snowy mountaintop, the glittering pinnacle, the pine woods, and ragged bare ravine, the eagle, soaring amidst the cloudsthey all gathered round me and bade me be at peace.
where had they fled when the next morning i awoke?
all of soulinspiriting fled with sleep, and dark melancholy clouded every thought.
the rain was pouring in torrents, and thick mists hid the summits of the mountains, so that i even saw not the faces of those mighty friends.
still i would penetrate their misty veil and seek them in their cloudy retreats.
what were rain and storm to me?
my mule was brought to the door, and i resolved to ascend to the summit of montanvert.
i remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous and evermoving glacier had produced upon my mind when i first saw it.
it had then filled me with a sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the soul and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy.
the sight of the awful and majestic in nature had indeed always the effect of solemnising my mind and causing me to forget the passing cares of life.
i determined to go without a guide, for i was well acquainted with the path, and the presence of another would destroy the solitary grandeur of the scene.
the ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short windings, which enable you to surmount the perpendicularity of the mountain.
it is a scene terrifically desolate.
in a thousand spots the traces of the winter avalanche may be perceived, where trees lie broken and strewed on the ground, some entirely destroyed, others bent, leaning upon the jutting rocks of the mountain or transversely upon other trees.
the path, as you ascend higher, is intersected by ravines of snow, down which stones continually roll from above; one of them is particularly dangerous, as the slightest sound, such as even speaking in a loud voice, produces a concussion of air sufficient to draw destruction upon the head of the speaker.
the pines are not tall or luxuriant, but they are sombre and add an air of severity to the scene.
i looked on the valley beneath; vast mists were rising from the rivers which ran through it and curling in thick wreaths around the opposite mountains, whose summits were hid in the uniform clouds, while rain poured from the dark sky and added to the melancholy impression i received from the objects around me.
alas!
why does man boast of sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only renders them more necessary beings.
if our impulses were confined to hunger, thirst, and desire, we might be nearly free; but now we are moved by every wind that blows and a chance word or scene that that word may convey to us.
we rest; a dream has power to poison sleep.
we rise; one wandring thought pollutes the day.
we feel, conceive, or reason; laugh or weep, embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away; it is the same: for, be it joy or sorrow, the path of its departure still is free.
mans yesterday may neer be like his morrow; nought may endure but mutability!
it was nearly noon when i arrived at the top of the ascent.
for some time i sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice.
a mist covered both that and the surrounding mountains.
presently a breeze dissipated the cloud, and i descended upon the glacier.
the surface is very uneven, rising like the waves of a troubled sea, descending low, and interspersed by rifts that sink deep.
the field of ice is almost a league in width, but i spent nearly two hours in crossing it.
the opposite mountain is a bare perpendicular rock.
from the side where i now stood montanvert was exactly opposite, at the distance of a league; and above it rose mont blanc, in awful majesty.
i remained in a recess of the rock, gazing on this wonderful and stupendous scene.
the sea, or rather the vast river of ice, wound among its dependent mountains, whose aerial summits hung over its recesses.
their icy and glittering peaks shone in the sunlight over the clouds.
my heart, which was before sorrowful, now swelled with something like joy; i exclaimed, wandering spirits, if indeed ye wander, and do not rest in your narrow beds, allow me this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion, away from the joys of life.
as i said this i suddenly beheld the figure of a man, at some distance, advancing towards me with superhuman speed.
he bounded over the crevices in the ice, among which i had walked with caution; his stature, also, as he approached, seemed to exceed that of man.
i was troubled; a mist came over my eyes, and i felt a faintness seize me, but i was quickly restored by the cold gale of the mountains.
i perceived, as the shape came nearer (sight tremendous and abhorred!)
that it was the wretch whom i had created.
i trembled with rage and horror, resolving to wait his approach and then close with him in mortal combat.
he approached; his countenance bespoke bitter anguish, combined with disdain and malignity, while its unearthly ugliness rendered it almost too horrible for human eyes.
but i scarcely observed this; rage and hatred had at first deprived me of utterance, and i recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious detestation and contempt.
devil, i exclaimed, do you dare approach me?
and do not you fear the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head?
begone, vile insect!
or rather, stay, that i may trample you to dust!
and, oh!
that i could, with the extinction of your miserable existence, restore those victims whom you have so diabolically murdered!
i expected this reception, said the dmon.
all men hate the wretched; how, then, must i be hated, who am miserable beyond all living things!
yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature, to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of one of us.
you purpose to kill me.
how dare you sport thus with life?
do your duty towards me, and i will do mine towards you and the rest of mankind.
if you will comply with my conditions, i will leave them and you at peace; but if you refuse, i will glut the maw of death, until it be satiated with the blood of your remaining friends.
abhorred monster!
fiend that thou art!
the tortures of hell are too mild a vengeance for thy crimes.
wretched devil!
you reproach me with your creation, come on, then, that i may extinguish the spark which i so negligently bestowed.
my rage was without bounds; i sprang on him, impelled by all the feelings which can arm one being against the existence of another.
he easily eluded me and said, be calm!
i entreat you to hear me before you give vent to your hatred on my devoted head.
have i not suffered enough, that you seek to increase my misery?
life, although it may only be an accumulation of anguish, is dear to me, and i will defend it.
remember, thou hast made me more powerful than thyself; my height is superior to thine, my joints more supple.
but i will not be tempted to set myself in opposition to thee.
i am thy creature, and i will be even mild and docile to my natural lord and king if thou wilt also perform thy part, the which thou owest me.
oh, frankenstein, be not equitable to every other and trample upon me alone, to whom thy justice, and even thy clemency and affection, is most due.
remember that i am thy creature; i ought to be thy adam, but i am rather the fallen angel, whom thou drivest from joy for no misdeed.
everywhere i see bliss, from which i alone am irrevocably excluded.
i was benevolent and good; misery made me a fiend.
make me happy, and i shall again be virtuous.
begone!
i will not hear you.
there can be no community between you and me; we are enemies.
begone, or let us try our strength in a fight, in which one must fall.
how can i move thee?
will no entreaties cause thee to turn a favourable eye upon thy creature, who implores thy goodness and compassion?
believe me, frankenstein, i was benevolent; my soul glowed with love and humanity; but am i not alone, miserably alone?
you, my creator, abhor me; what hope can i gather from your fellow creatures, who owe me nothing?
they spurn and hate me.
the desert mountains and dreary glaciers are my refuge.
i have wandered here many days; the caves of ice, which i only do not fear, are a dwelling to me, and the only one which man does not grudge.
these bleak skies i hail, for they are kinder to me than your fellow beings.
if the multitude of mankind knew of my existence, they would do as you do, and arm themselves for my destruction.
shall i not then hate them who abhor me?
i will keep no terms with my enemies.
i am miserable, and they shall share my wretchedness.
yet it is in your power to recompense me, and deliver them from an evil which it only remains for you to make so great, that not only you and your family, but thousands of others, shall be swallowed up in the whirlwinds of its rage.
let your compassion be moved, and do not disdain me.
listen to my tale; when you have heard that, abandon or commiserate me, as you shall judge that i deserve.
but hear me.
the guilty are allowed, by human laws, bloody as they are, to speak in their own defence before they are condemned.
listen to me, frankenstein.
you accuse me of murder, and yet you would, with a satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature.
oh, praise the eternal justice of man!
yet i ask you not to spare me; listen to me, and then, if you can, and if you will, destroy the work of your hands.
why do you call to my remembrance, i rejoined, circumstances of which i shudder to reflect, that i have been the miserable origin and author?
cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw light!
cursed (although i curse myself) be the hands that formed you!
you have made me wretched beyond expression.
you have left me no power to consider whether i am just to you or not.
begone!
relieve me from the sight of your detested form.
thus i relieve thee, my creator, he said, and placed his hated hands before my eyes, which i flung from me with violence; thus i take from thee a sight which you abhor.
still thou canst listen to me and grant me thy compassion.
by the virtues that i once possessed, i demand this from you.
hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of this place is not fitting to your fine sensations; come to the hut upon the mountain.
the sun is yet high in the heavens; before it descends to hide itself behind your snowy precipices and illuminate another world, you will have heard my story and can decide.
on you it rests, whether i quit for ever the neighbourhood of man and lead a harmless life, or become the scourge of your fellow creatures and the author of your own speedy ruin.
as he said this he led the way across the ice; i followed.
my heart was full, and i did not answer him, but as i proceeded, i weighed the various arguments that he had used and determined at least to listen to his tale.
i was partly urged by curiosity, and compassion confirmed my resolution.
i had hitherto supposed him to be the murderer of my brother, and i eagerly sought a confirmation or denial of this opinion.
for the first time, also, i felt what the duties of a creator towards his creature were, and that i ought to render him happy before i complained of his wickedness.
these motives urged me to comply with his demand.
we crossed the ice, therefore, and ascended the opposite rock.
the air was cold, and the rain again began to descend; we entered the hut, the fiend with an air of exultation, i with a heavy heart and depressed spirits.
but i consented to listen, and seating myself by the fire which my odious companion had lighted, he thus began his tale.
chapter 11 it is with considerable difficulty that i remember the original era of my being; all the events of that period appear confused and indistinct.
a strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and i saw, felt, heard, and smelt at the same time; and it was, indeed, a long time before i learned to distinguish between the operations of my various senses.
by degrees, i remember, a stronger light pressed upon my nerves, so that i was obliged to shut my eyes.
darkness then came over me and troubled me, but hardly had i felt this when, by opening my eyes, as i now suppose, the light poured in upon me again.
i walked and, i believe, descended, but i presently found a great alteration in my sensations.
before, dark and opaque bodies had surrounded me, impervious to my touch or sight; but i now found that i could wander on at liberty, with no obstacles which i could not either surmount or avoid.
the light became more and more oppressive to me, and the heat wearying me as i walked, i sought a place where i could receive shade.
this was the forest near ingolstadt; and here i lay by the side of a brook resting from my fatigue, until i felt tormented by hunger and thirst.
this roused me from my nearly dormant state, and i ate some berries which i found hanging on the trees or lying on the ground.
i slaked my thirst at the brook, and then lying down, was overcome by sleep.
it was dark when i awoke; i felt cold also, and half frightened, as it were, instinctively, finding myself so desolate.
before i had quitted your apartment, on a sensation of cold, i had covered myself with some clothes, but these were insufficient to secure me from the dews of night.
i was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; i knew, and could distinguish, nothing; but feeling pain invade me on all sides, i sat down and wept.
soon a gentle light stole over the heavens and gave me a sensation of pleasure.
i started up and beheld a radiant form rise from among the trees.
the moon i gazed with a kind of wonder.
it moved slowly, but it enlightened my path, and i again went out in search of berries.
i was still cold when under one of the trees i found a huge cloak, with which i covered myself, and sat down upon the ground.
no distinct ideas occupied my mind; all was confused.
i felt light, and hunger, and thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rang in my ears, and on all sides various scents saluted me; the only object that i could distinguish was the bright moon, and i fixed my eyes on that with pleasure.
several changes of day and night passed, and the orb of night had greatly lessened, when i began to distinguish my sensations from each other.
i gradually saw plainly the clear stream that supplied me with drink and the trees that shaded me with their foliage.
i was delighted when i first discovered that a pleasant sound, which often saluted my ears, proceeded from the throats of the little winged animals who had often intercepted the light from my eyes.
i began also to observe, with greater accuracy, the forms that surrounded me and to perceive the boundaries of the radiant roof of light which canopied me.
sometimes i tried to imitate the pleasant songs of the birds but was unable.
sometimes i wished to express my sensations in my own mode, but the uncouth and inarticulate sounds which broke from me frightened me into silence again.
the moon had disappeared from the night, and again, with a lessened form, showed itself, while i still remained in the forest.
my sensations had by this time become distinct, and my mind received every day additional ideas.
my eyes became accustomed to the light and to perceive objects in their right forms; i distinguished the insect from the herb, and by degrees, one herb from another.
i found that the sparrow uttered none but harsh notes, whilst those of the blackbird and thrush were sweet and enticing.
one day, when i was oppressed by cold, i found a fire which had been left by some wandering beggars, and was overcome with delight at the warmth i experienced from it.
in my joy i thrust my hand into the live embers, but quickly drew it out again with a cry of pain.
how strange, i thought, that the same cause should produce such opposite effects!
i examined the materials of the fire, and to my joy found it to be composed of wood.
i quickly collected some branches, but they were wet and would not burn.
i was pained at this and sat still watching the operation of the fire.
the wet wood which i had placed near the heat dried and itself became inflamed.
i reflected on this, and by touching the various branches, i discovered the cause and busied myself in collecting a great quantity of wood, that i might dry it and have a plentiful supply of fire.
when night came on and brought sleep with it, i was in the greatest fear lest my fire should be extinguished.
i covered it carefully with dry wood and leaves and placed wet branches upon it; and then, spreading my cloak, i lay on the ground and sank into sleep.
it was morning when i awoke, and my first care was to visit the fire.
i uncovered it, and a gentle breeze quickly fanned it into a flame.
i observed this also and contrived a fan of branches, which roused the embers when they were nearly extinguished.
when night came again i found, with pleasure, that the fire gave light as well as heat and that the discovery of this element was useful to me in my food, for i found some of the offals that the travellers had left had been roasted, and tasted much more savoury than the berries i gathered from the trees.
i tried, therefore, to dress my food in the same manner, placing it on the live embers.
i found that the berries were spoiled by this operation, and the nuts and roots much improved.
food, however, became scarce, and i often spent the whole day searching in vain for a few acorns to assuage the pangs of hunger.
when i found this, i resolved to quit the place that i had hitherto inhabited, to seek for one where the few wants i experienced would be more easily satisfied.
in this emigration i exceedingly lamented the loss of the fire which i had obtained through accident and knew not how to reproduce it.
i gave several hours to the serious consideration of this difficulty, but i was obliged to relinquish all attempt to supply it, and wrapping myself up in my cloak, i struck across the wood towards the setting sun.
i passed three days in these rambles and at length discovered the open country.
a great fall of snow had taken place the night before, and the fields were of one uniform white; the appearance was disconsolate, and i found my feet chilled by the cold damp substance that covered the ground.
it was about seven in the morning, and i longed to obtain food and shelter; at length i perceived a small hut, on a rising ground, which had doubtless been built for the convenience of some shepherd.
this was a new sight to me, and i examined the structure with great curiosity.
finding the door open, i entered.
an old man sat in it, near a fire, over which he was preparing his breakfast.
he turned on hearing a noise, and perceiving me, shrieked loudly, and quitting the hut, ran across the fields with a speed of which his debilitated form hardly appeared capable.
his appearance, different from any i had ever before seen, and his flight somewhat surprised me.
but i was enchanted by the appearance of the hut; here the snow and rain could not penetrate; the ground was dry; and it presented to me then as exquisite and divine a retreat as pandmonium appeared to the dmons of hell after their sufferings in the lake of fire.
i greedily devoured the remnants of the shepherds breakfast, which consisted of bread, cheese, milk, and wine; the latter, however, i did not like.
then, overcome by fatigue, i lay down among some straw and fell asleep.
it was noon when i awoke, and allured by the warmth of the sun, which shone brightly on the white ground, i determined to recommence my travels; and, depositing the remains of the peasants breakfast in a wallet i found, i proceeded across the fields for several hours, until at sunset i arrived at a village.
how miraculous did this appear!
the huts, the neater cottages, and stately houses engaged my admiration by turns.
the vegetables in the gardens, the milk and cheese that i saw placed at the windows of some of the cottages, allured my appetite.
one of the best of these i entered, but i had hardly placed my foot within the door before the children shrieked, and one of the women fainted.
the whole village was roused; some fled, some attacked me, until, grievously bruised by stones and many other kinds of missile weapons, i escaped to the open country and fearfully took refuge in a low hovel, quite bare, and making a wretched appearance after the palaces i had beheld in the village.
this hovel however, joined a cottage of a neat and pleasant appearance, but after my late dearly bought experience, i dared not enter it.
my place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so low that i could with difficulty sit upright in it.
no wood, however, was placed on the earth, which formed the floor, but it was dry; and although the wind entered it by innumerable chinks, i found it an agreeable asylum from the snow and rain.
here, then, i retreated and lay down happy to have found a shelter, however miserable, from the inclemency of the season, and still more from the barbarity of man.
as soon as morning dawned i crept from my kennel, that i might view the adjacent cottage and discover if i could remain in the habitation i had found.
it was situated against the back of the cottage and surrounded on the sides which were exposed by a pig sty and a clear pool of water.
one part was open, and by that i had crept in; but now i covered every crevice by which i might be perceived with stones and wood, yet in such a manner that i might move them on occasion to pass out; all the light i enjoyed came through the sty, and that was sufficient for me.
having thus arranged my dwelling and carpeted it with clean straw, i retired, for i saw the figure of a man at a distance, and i remembered too well my treatment the night before to trust myself in his power.
i had first, however, provided for my sustenance for that day by a loaf of coarse bread, which i purloined, and a cup with which i could drink more conveniently than from my hand of the pure water which flowed by my retreat.
the floor was a little raised, so that it was kept perfectly dry, and by its vicinity to the chimney of the cottage it was tolerably warm.
being thus provided, i resolved to reside in this hovel until something should occur which might alter my determination.
it was indeed a paradise compared to the bleak forest, my former residence, the raindropping branches, and dank earth.
i ate my breakfast with pleasure and was about to remove a plank to procure myself a little water when i heard a step, and looking through a small chink, i beheld a young creature, with a pail on her head, passing before my hovel.
the girl was young and of gentle demeanour, unlike what i have since found cottagers and farmhouse servants to be.
yet she was meanly dressed, a coarse blue petticoat and a linen jacket being her only garb; her fair hair was plaited but not adorned: she looked patient yet sad.
i lost sight of her, and in about a quarter of an hour she returned bearing the pail, which was now partly filled with milk.
as she walked along, seemingly incommoded by the burden, a young man met her, whose countenance expressed a deeper despondence.
uttering a few sounds with an air of melancholy, he took the pail from her head and bore it to the cottage himself.
she followed, and they disappeared.
presently i saw the young man again, with some tools in his hand, cross the field behind the cottage; and the girl was also busied, sometimes in the house and sometimes in the yard.
on examining my dwelling, i found that one of the windows of the cottage had formerly occupied a part of it, but the panes had been filled up with wood.
in one of these was a small and almost imperceptible chink through which the eye could just penetrate.
through this crevice a small room was visible, whitewashed and clean but very bare of furniture.
in one corner, near a small fire, sat an old man, leaning his head on his hands in a disconsolate attitude.
the young girl was occupied in arranging the cottage; but presently she took something out of a drawer, which employed her hands, and she sat down beside the old man, who, taking up an instrument, began to play and to produce sounds sweeter than the voice of the thrush or the nightingale.
it was a lovely sight, even to me, poor wretch who had never beheld aught beautiful before.
the silver hair and benevolent countenance of the aged cottager won my reverence, while the gentle manners of the girl enticed my love.
he played a sweet mournful air which i perceived drew tears from the eyes of his amiable companion, of which the old man took no notice, until she sobbed audibly; he then pronounced a few sounds, and the fair creature, leaving her work, knelt at his feet.
he raised her and smiled with such kindness and affection that i felt sensations of a peculiar and overpowering nature; they were a mixture of pain and pleasure, such as i had never before experienced, either from hunger or cold, warmth or food; and i withdrew from the window, unable to bear these emotions.
soon after this the young man returned, bearing on his shoulders a load of wood.
the girl met him at the door, helped to relieve him of his burden, and taking some of the fuel into the cottage, placed it on the fire; then she and the youth went apart into a nook of the cottage, and he showed her a large loaf and a piece of cheese.
she seemed pleased and went into the garden for some roots and plants, which she placed in water, and then upon the fire.
she afterwards continued her work, whilst the young man went into the garden and appeared busily employed in digging and pulling up roots.
after he had been employed thus about an hour, the young woman joined him and they entered the cottage together.
the old man had, in the meantime, been pensive, but on the appearance of his companions he assumed a more cheerful air, and they sat down to eat.
the meal was quickly dispatched.
the young woman was again occupied in arranging the cottage, the old man walked before the cottage in the sun for a few minutes, leaning on the arm of the youth.
nothing could exceed in beauty the contrast between these two excellent creatures.
one was old, with silver hairs and a countenance beaming with benevolence and love; the younger was slight and graceful in his figure, and his features were moulded with the finest symmetry, yet his eyes and attitude expressed the utmost sadness and despondency.
the old man returned to the cottage, and the youth, with tools different from those he had used in the morning, directed his steps across the fields.
night quickly shut in, but to my extreme wonder, i found that the cottagers had a means of prolonging light by the use of tapers, and was delighted to find that the setting of the sun did not put an end to the pleasure i experienced in watching my human neighbours.
in the evening the young girl and her companion were employed in various occupations which i did not understand; and the old man again took up the instrument which produced the divine sounds that had enchanted me in the morning.
so soon as he had finished, the youth began, not to play, but to utter sounds that were monotonous, and neither resembling the harmony of the old mans instrument nor the songs of the birds; i since found that he read aloud, but at that time i knew nothing of the science of words or letters.
the family, after having been thus occupied for a short time, extinguished their lights and retired, as i conjectured, to rest.
chapter 12 i lay on my straw, but i could not sleep.
i thought of the occurrences of the day.
what chiefly struck me was the gentle manners of these people, and i longed to join them, but dared not.
i remembered too well the treatment i had suffered the night before from the barbarous villagers, and resolved, whatever course of conduct i might hereafter think it right to pursue, that for the present i would remain quietly in my hovel, watching and endeavouring to discover the motives which influenced their actions.
the cottagers arose the next morning before the sun.
the young woman arranged the cottage and prepared the food, and the youth departed after the first meal.
this day was passed in the same routine as that which preceded it.
the young man was constantly employed out of doors, and the girl in various laborious occupations within.
the old man, whom i soon perceived to be blind, employed his leisure hours on his instrument or in contemplation.
nothing could exceed the love and respect which the younger cottagers exhibited towards their venerable companion.
they performed towards him every little office of affection and duty with gentleness, and he rewarded them by his benevolent smiles.
they were not entirely happy.
the young man and his companion often went apart and appeared to weep.
i saw no cause for their unhappiness, but i was deeply affected by it.
if such lovely creatures were miserable, it was less strange that i, an imperfect and solitary being, should be wretched.
yet why were these gentle beings unhappy?
they possessed a delightful house (for such it was in my eyes) and every luxury; they had a fire to warm them when chill and delicious viands when hungry; they were dressed in excellent clothes; and, still more, they enjoyed one anothers company and speech, interchanging each day looks of affection and kindness.
what did their tears imply?
did they really express pain?
i was at first unable to solve these questions, but perpetual attention and time explained to me many appearances which were at first enigmatic.
a considerable period elapsed before i discovered one of the causes of the uneasiness of this amiable family: it was poverty, and they suffered that evil in a very distressing degree.
their nourishment consisted entirely of the vegetables of their garden and the milk of one cow, which gave very little during the winter, when its masters could scarcely procure food to support it.
they often, i believe, suffered the pangs of hunger very poignantly, especially the two younger cottagers, for several times they placed food before the old man when they reserved none for themselves.
this trait of kindness moved me sensibly.
i had been accustomed, during the night, to steal a part of their store for my own consumption, but when i found that in doing this i inflicted pain on the cottagers, i abstained and satisfied myself with berries, nuts, and roots which i gathered from a neighbouring wood.
i discovered also another means through which i was enabled to assist their labours.
i found that the youth spent a great part of each day in collecting wood for the family fire, and during the night i often took his tools, the use of which i quickly discovered, and brought home firing sufficient for the consumption of several days.
i remember, the first time that i did this, the young woman, when she opened the door in the morning, appeared greatly astonished on seeing a great pile of wood on the outside.
she uttered some words in a loud voice, and the youth joined her, who also expressed surprise.
i observed, with pleasure, that he did not go to the forest that day, but spent it in repairing the cottage and cultivating the garden.
by degrees i made a discovery of still greater moment.
i found that these people possessed a method of communicating their experience and feelings to one another by articulate sounds.
i perceived that the words they spoke sometimes produced pleasure or pain, smiles or sadness, in the minds and countenances of the hearers.
this was indeed a godlike science, and i ardently desired to become acquainted with it.
but i was baffled in every attempt i made for this purpose.
their pronunciation was quick, and the words they uttered, not having any apparent connection with visible objects, i was unable to discover any clue by which i could unravel the mystery of their reference.
by great application, however, and after having remained during the space of several revolutions of the moon in my hovel, i discovered the names that were given to some of the most familiar objects of discourse; i learned and applied the words, fire, milk, bread, and wood.
i learned also the names of the cottagers themselves.
the youth and his companion had each of them several names, but the old man had only one, which was father.
the girl was called sister or agatha, and the youth felix, brother, or son.
i cannot describe the delight i felt when i learned the ideas appropriated to each of these sounds and was able to pronounce them.
i distinguished several other words without being able as yet to understand or apply them, such as good, dearest, unhappy.
i spent the winter in this manner.
the gentle manners and beauty of the cottagers greatly endeared them to me; when they were unhappy, i felt depressed; when they rejoiced, i sympathised in their joys.
i saw few human beings besides them, and if any other happened to enter the cottage, their harsh manners and rude gait only enhanced to me the superior accomplishments of my friends.
the old man, i could perceive, often endeavoured to encourage his children, as sometimes i found that he called them, to cast off their melancholy.
he would talk in a cheerful accent, with an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure even upon me.
agatha listened with respect, her eyes sometimes filled with tears, which she endeavoured to wipe away unperceived; but i generally found that her countenance and tone were more cheerful after having listened to the exhortations of her father.
it was not thus with felix.
he was always the saddest of the group, and even to my unpractised senses, he appeared to have suffered more deeply than his friends.
but if his countenance was more sorrowful, his voice was more cheerful than that of his sister, especially when he addressed the old man.
i could mention innumerable instances which, although slight, marked the dispositions of these amiable cottagers.
in the midst of poverty and want, felix carried with pleasure to his sister the first little white flower that peeped out from beneath the snowy ground.
early in the morning, before she had risen, he cleared away the snow that obstructed her path to the milkhouse, drew water from the well, and brought the wood from the outhouse, where, to his perpetual astonishment, he found his store always replenished by an invisible hand.
in the day, i believe, he worked sometimes for a neighbouring farmer, because he often went forth and did not return until dinner, yet brought no wood with him.
at other times he worked in the garden, but as there was little to do in the frosty season, he read to the old man and agatha.
this reading had puzzled me extremely at first, but by degrees i discovered that he uttered many of the same sounds when he read as when he talked.
i conjectured, therefore, that he found on the paper signs for speech which he understood, and i ardently longed to comprehend these also; but how was that possible when i did not even understand the sounds for which they stood as signs?
i improved, however, sensibly in this science, but not sufficiently to follow up any kind of conversation, although i applied my whole mind to the endeavour, for i easily perceived that, although i eagerly longed to discover myself to the cottagers, i ought not to make the attempt until i had first become master of their language, which knowledge might enable me to make them overlook the deformity of my figure, for with this also the contrast perpetually presented to my eyes had made me acquainted.
i had admired the perfect forms of my cottagerstheir grace, beauty, and delicate complexions; but how was i terrified when i viewed myself in a transparent pool!
at first i started back, unable to believe that it was indeed i who was reflected in the mirror; and when i became fully convinced that i was in reality the monster that i am, i was filled with the bitterest sensations of despondence and mortification.
alas!
i did not yet entirely know the fatal effects of this miserable deformity.
as the sun became warmer and the light of day longer, the snow vanished, and i beheld the bare trees and the black earth.
from this time felix was more employed, and the heartmoving indications of impending famine disappeared.
their food, as i afterwards found, was coarse, but it was wholesome; and they procured a sufficiency of it.
several new kinds of plants sprang up in the garden, which they dressed; and these signs of comfort increased daily as the season advanced.
the old man, leaning on his son, walked each day at noon, when it did not rain, as i found it was called when the heavens poured forth its waters.
this frequently took place, but a high wind quickly dried the earth, and the season became far more pleasant than it had been.
my mode of life in my hovel was uniform.
during the morning i attended the motions of the cottagers, and when they were dispersed in various occupations, i slept; the remainder of the day was spent in observing my friends.
when they had retired to rest, if there was any moon or the night was starlight, i went into the woods and collected my own food and fuel for the cottage.
when i returned, as often as it was necessary, i cleared their path from the snow and performed those offices that i had seen done by felix.
i afterwards found that these labours, performed by an invisible hand, greatly astonished them; and once or twice i heard them, on these occasions, utter the words good spirit, wonderful; but i did not then understand the signification of these terms.
my thoughts now became more active, and i longed to discover the motives and feelings of these lovely creatures; i was inquisitive to know why felix appeared so miserable and agatha so sad.
i thought (foolish wretch!)
that it might be in my power to restore happiness to these deserving people.
when i slept or was absent, the forms of the venerable blind father, the gentle agatha, and the excellent felix flitted before me.
i looked upon them as superior beings who would be the arbiters of my future destiny.
i formed in my imagination a thousand pictures of presenting myself to them, and their reception of me.
i imagined that they would be disgusted, until, by my gentle demeanour and conciliating words, i should first win their favour and afterwards their love.
these thoughts exhilarated me and led me to apply with fresh ardour to the acquiring the art of language.
my organs were indeed harsh, but supple; and although my voice was very unlike the soft music of their tones, yet i pronounced such words as i understood with tolerable ease.
it was as the ass and the lapdog; yet surely the gentle ass whose intentions were affectionate, although his manners were rude, deserved better treatment than blows and execration.
the pleasant showers and genial warmth of spring greatly altered the aspect of the earth.
men who before this change seemed to have been hid in caves dispersed themselves and were employed in various arts of cultivation.
the birds sang in more cheerful notes, and the leaves began to bud forth on the trees.
happy, happy earth!
fit habitation for gods, which, so short a time before, was bleak, damp, and unwholesome.
my spirits were elevated by the enchanting appearance of nature; the past was blotted from my memory, the present was tranquil, and the future gilded by bright rays of hope and anticipations of joy.
chapter 13 i now hasten to the more moving part of my story.
i shall relate events that impressed me with feelings which, from what i had been, have made me what i am.
spring advanced rapidly; the weather became fine and the skies cloudless.
it surprised me that what before was desert and gloomy should now bloom with the most beautiful flowers and verdure.
my senses were gratified and refreshed by a thousand scents of delight and a thousand sights of beauty.
it was on one of these days, when my cottagers periodically rested from labourthe old man played on his guitar, and the children listened to himthat i observed the countenance of felix was melancholy beyond expression; he sighed frequently, and once his father paused in his music, and i conjectured by his manner that he inquired the cause of his sons sorrow.
felix replied in a cheerful accent, and the old man was recommencing his music when someone tapped at the door.
it was a lady on horseback, accompanied by a countryman as a guide.
the lady was dressed in a dark suit and covered with a thick black veil.
agatha asked a question, to which the stranger only replied by pronouncing, in a sweet accent, the name of felix.
her voice was musical but unlike that of either of my friends.
on hearing this word, felix came up hastily to the lady, who, when she saw him, threw up her veil, and i beheld a countenance of angelic beauty and expression.
her hair of a shining raven black, and curiously braided; her eyes were dark, but gentle, although animated; her features of a regular proportion, and her complexion wondrously fair, each cheek tinged with a lovely pink.
felix seemed ravished with delight when he saw her, every trait of sorrow vanished from his face, and it instantly expressed a degree of ecstatic joy, of which i could hardly have believed it capable; his eyes sparkled, as his cheek flushed with pleasure; and at that moment i thought him as beautiful as the stranger.
she appeared affected by different feelings; wiping a few tears from her lovely eyes, she held out her hand to felix, who kissed it rapturously and called her, as well as i could distinguish, his sweet arabian.
she did not appear to understand him, but smiled.
he assisted her to dismount, and dismissing her guide, conducted her into the cottage.
some conversation took place between him and his father, and the young stranger knelt at the old mans feet and would have kissed his hand, but he raised her and embraced her affectionately.
i soon perceived that although the stranger uttered articulate sounds and appeared to have a language of her own, she was neither understood by nor herself understood the cottagers.
they made many signs which i did not comprehend, but i saw that her presence diffused gladness through the cottage, dispelling their sorrow as the sun dissipates the morning mists.
felix seemed peculiarly happy and with smiles of delight welcomed his arabian.
agatha, the evergentle agatha, kissed the hands of the lovely stranger, and pointing to her brother, made signs which appeared to me to mean that he had been sorrowful until she came.
some hours passed thus, while they, by their countenances, expressed joy, the cause of which i did not comprehend.
presently i found, by the frequent recurrence of some sound which the stranger repeated after them, that she was endeavouring to learn their language; and the idea instantly occurred to me that i should make use of the same instructions to the same end.
the stranger learned about twenty words at the first lesson; most of them, indeed, were those which i had before understood, but i profited by the others.
as night came on, agatha and the arabian retired early.
when they separated felix kissed the hand of the stranger and said, good night sweet safie.
he sat up much longer, conversing with his father, and by the frequent repetition of her name i conjectured that their lovely guest was the subject of their conversation.
i ardently desired to understand them, and bent every faculty towards that purpose, but found it utterly impossible.
the next morning felix went out to his work, and after the usual occupations of agatha were finished, the arabian sat at the feet of the old man, and taking his guitar, played some airs so entrancingly beautiful that they at once drew tears of sorrow and delight from my eyes.
she sang, and her voice flowed in a rich cadence, swelling or dying away like a nightingale of the woods.
when she had finished, she gave the guitar to agatha, who at first declined it.
she played a simple air, and her voice accompanied it in sweet accents, but unlike the wondrous strain of the stranger.
the old man appeared enraptured and said some words which agatha endeavoured to explain to safie, and by which he appeared to wish to express that she bestowed on him the greatest delight by her music.
the days now passed as peaceably as before, with the sole alteration that joy had taken place of sadness in the countenances of my friends.
safie was always gay and happy; she and i improved rapidly in the knowledge of language, so that in two months i began to comprehend most of the words uttered by my protectors.
in the meanwhile also the black ground was covered with herbage, and the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers, sweet to the scent and the eyes, stars of pale radiance among the moonlight woods; the sun became warmer, the nights clear and balmy; and my nocturnal rambles were an extreme pleasure to me, although they were considerably shortened by the late setting and early rising of the sun, for i never ventured abroad during daylight, fearful of meeting with the same treatment i had formerly endured in the first village which i entered.
my days were spent in close attention, that i might more speedily master the language; and i may boast that i improved more rapidly than the arabian, who understood very little and conversed in broken accents, whilst i comprehended and could imitate almost every word that was spoken.
while i improved in speech, i also learned the science of letters as it was taught to the stranger, and this opened before me a wide field for wonder and delight.
the book from which felix instructed safie was volneys ruins of empires.
i should not have understood the purport of this book had not felix, in reading it, given very minute explanations.
he had chosen this work, he said, because the declamatory style was framed in imitation of the eastern authors.
through this work i obtained a cursory knowledge of history and a view of the several empires at present existing in the world; it gave me an insight into the manners, governments, and religions of the different nations of the earth.
i heard of the slothful asiatics, of the stupendous genius and mental activity of the grecians, of the wars and wonderful virtue of the early romansof their subsequent degeneratingof the decline of that mighty empire, of chivalry, christianity, and kings.
i heard of the discovery of the american hemisphere and wept with safie over the hapless fate of its original inhabitants.
these wonderful narrations inspired me with strange feelings.
was man, indeed, at once so powerful, so virtuous and magnificent, yet so vicious and base?
he appeared at one time a mere scion of the evil principle and at another as all that can be conceived of noble and godlike.
to be a great and virtuous man appeared the highest honour that can befall a sensitive being; to be base and vicious, as many on record have been, appeared the lowest degradation, a condition more abject than that of the blind mole or harmless worm.
for a long time i could not conceive how one man could go forth to murder his fellow, or even why there were laws and governments; but when i heard details of vice and bloodshed, my wonder ceased and i turned away with disgust and loathing.
every conversation of the cottagers now opened new wonders to me.
while i listened to the instructions which felix bestowed upon the arabian, the strange system of human society was explained to me.
i heard of the division of property, of immense wealth and squalid poverty, of rank, descent, and noble blood.
the words induced me to turn towards myself.
i learned that the possessions most esteemed by your fellow creatures were high and unsullied descent united with riches.
a man might be respected with only one of these advantages, but without either he was considered, except in very rare instances, as a vagabond and a slave, doomed to waste his powers for the profits of the chosen few!
and what was i?
of my creation and creator i was absolutely ignorant, but i knew that i possessed no money, no friends, no kind of property.
i was, besides, endued with a figure hideously deformed and loathsome; i was not even of the same nature as man.
i was more agile than they and could subsist upon coarser diet; i bore the extremes of heat and cold with less injury to my frame; my stature far exceeded theirs.
when i looked around i saw and heard of none like me.
was i, then, a monster, a blot upon the earth, from which all men fled and whom all men disowned?
i cannot describe to you the agony that these reflections inflicted upon me; i tried to dispel them, but sorrow only increased with knowledge.
oh, that i had for ever remained in my native wood, nor known nor felt beyond the sensations of hunger, thirst, and heat!
of what a strange nature is knowledge!
it clings to the mind when it has once seized on it like a lichen on the rock.
i wished sometimes to shake off all thought and feeling, but i learned that there was but one means to overcome the sensation of pain, and that was deatha state which i feared yet did not understand.
i admired virtue and good feelings and loved the gentle manners and amiable qualities of my cottagers, but i was shut out from intercourse with them, except through means which i obtained by stealth, when i was unseen and unknown, and which rather increased than satisfied the desire i had of becoming one among my fellows.
the gentle words of agatha and the animated smiles of the charming arabian were not for me.
the mild exhortations of the old man and the lively conversation of the loved felix were not for me.
miserable, unhappy wretch!
other lessons were impressed upon me even more deeply.
i heard of the difference of sexes, and the birth and growth of children, how the father doted on the smiles of the infant, and the lively sallies of the older child, how all the life and cares of the mother were wrapped up in the precious charge, how the mind of youth expanded and gained knowledge, of brother, sister, and all the various relationships which bind one human being to another in mutual bonds.
but where were my friends and relations?
no father had watched my infant days, no mother had blessed me with smiles and caresses; or if they had, all my past life was now a blot, a blind vacancy in which i distinguished nothing.
from my earliest remembrance i had been as i then was in height and proportion.
i had never yet seen a being resembling me or who claimed any intercourse with me.
what was i?
the question again recurred, to be answered only with groans.
i will soon explain to what these feelings tended, but allow me now to return to the cottagers, whose story excited in me such various feelings of indignation, delight, and wonder, but which all terminated in additional love and reverence for my protectors (for so i loved, in an innocent, halfpainful selfdeceit, to call them).
chapter 14 some time elapsed before i learned the history of my friends.
it was one which could not fail to impress itself deeply on my mind, unfolding as it did a number of circumstances, each interesting and wonderful to one so utterly inexperienced as i was.
the name of the old man was de lacey.
he was descended from a good family in france, where he had lived for many years in affluence, respected by his superiors and beloved by his equals.
his son was bred in the service of his country, and agatha had ranked with ladies of the highest distinction.
a few months before my arrival they had lived in a large and luxurious city called paris, surrounded by friends and possessed of every enjoyment which virtue, refinement of intellect, or taste, accompanied by a moderate fortune, could afford.
the father of safie had been the cause of their ruin.
he was a turkish merchant and had inhabited paris for many years, when, for some reason which i could not learn, he became obnoxious to the government.
he was seized and cast into prison the very day that safie arrived from constantinople to join him.
he was tried and condemned to death.
the injustice of his sentence was very flagrant; all paris was indignant; and it was judged that his religion and wealth rather than the crime alleged against him had been the cause of his condemnation.
felix had accidentally been present at the trial; his horror and indignation were uncontrollable when he heard the decision of the court.
he made, at that moment, a solemn vow to deliver him and then looked around for the means.
after many fruitless attempts to gain admittance to the prison, he found a strongly grated window in an unguarded part of the building, which lighted the dungeon of the unfortunate muhammadan, who, loaded with chains, waited in despair the execution of the barbarous sentence.
felix visited the grate at night and made known to the prisoner his intentions in his favour.
the turk, amazed and delighted, endeavoured to kindle the zeal of his deliverer by promises of reward and wealth.
felix rejected his offers with contempt, yet when he saw the lovely safie, who was allowed to visit her father and who by her gestures expressed her lively gratitude, the youth could not help owning to his own mind that the captive possessed a treasure which would fully reward his toil and hazard.
the turk quickly perceived the impression that his daughter had made on the heart of felix and endeavoured to secure him more entirely in his interests by the promise of her hand in marriage so soon as he should be conveyed to a place of safety.
felix was too delicate to accept this offer, yet he looked forward to the probability of the event as to the consummation of his happiness.
during the ensuing days, while the preparations were going forward for the escape of the merchant, the zeal of felix was warmed by several letters that he received from this lovely girl, who found means to express her thoughts in the language of her lover by the aid of an old man, a servant of her father who understood french.
she thanked him in the most ardent terms for his intended services towards her parent, and at the same time she gently deplored her own fate.
i have copies of these letters, for i found means, during my residence in the hovel, to procure the implements of writing; and the letters were often in the hands of felix or agatha.
before i depart i will give them to you; they will prove the truth of my tale; but at present, as the sun is already far declined, i shall only have time to repeat the substance of them to you.
safie related that her mother was a christian arab, seized and made a slave by the turks; recommended by her beauty, she had won the heart of the father of safie, who married her.
the young girl spoke in high and enthusiastic terms of her mother, who, born in freedom, spurned the bondage to which she was now reduced.
she instructed her daughter in the tenets of her religion and taught her to aspire to higher powers of intellect and an independence of spirit forbidden to the female followers of muhammad.
this lady died, but her lessons were indelibly impressed on the mind of safie, who sickened at the prospect of again returning to asia and being immured within the walls of a harem, allowed only to occupy herself with infantile amusements, illsuited to the temper of her soul, now accustomed to grand ideas and a noble emulation for virtue.
the prospect of marrying a christian and remaining in a country where women were allowed to take a rank in society was enchanting to her.
the day for the execution of the turk was fixed, but on the night previous to it he quitted his prison and before morning was distant many leagues from paris.
felix had procured passports in the name of his father, sister, and himself.
he had previously communicated his plan to the former, who aided the deceit by quitting his house, under the pretence of a journey and concealed himself, with his daughter, in an obscure part of paris.
felix conducted the fugitives through france to lyons and across mont cenis to leghorn, where the merchant had decided to wait a favourable opportunity of passing into some part of the turkish dominions.
safie resolved to remain with her father until the moment of his departure, before which time the turk renewed his promise that she should be united to his deliverer; and felix remained with them in expectation of that event; and in the meantime he enjoyed the society of the arabian, who exhibited towards him the simplest and tenderest affection.
they conversed with one another through the means of an interpreter, and sometimes with the interpretation of looks; and safie sang to him the divine airs of her native country.
the turk allowed this intimacy to take place and encouraged the hopes of the youthful lovers, while in his heart he had formed far other plans.
he loathed the idea that his daughter should be united to a christian, but he feared the resentment of felix if he should appear lukewarm, for he knew that he was still in the power of his deliverer if he should choose to betray him to the italian state which they inhabited.
he revolved a thousand plans by which he should be enabled to prolong the deceit until it might be no longer necessary, and secretly to take his daughter with him when he departed.
his plans were facilitated by the news which arrived from paris.
the government of france were greatly enraged at the escape of their victim and spared no pains to detect and punish his deliverer.
the plot of felix was quickly discovered, and de lacey and agatha were thrown into prison.
the news reached felix and roused him from his dream of pleasure.
his blind and aged father and his gentle sister lay in a noisome dungeon while he enjoyed the free air and the society of her whom he loved.
this idea was torture to him.
he quickly arranged with the turk that if the latter should find a favourable opportunity for escape before felix could return to italy, safie should remain as a boarder at a convent at leghorn; and then, quitting the lovely arabian, he hastened to paris and delivered himself up to the vengeance of the law, hoping to free de lacey and agatha by this proceeding.
he did not succeed.
they remained confined for five months before the trial took place, the result of which deprived them of their fortune and condemned them to a perpetual exile from their native country.
they found a miserable asylum in the cottage in germany, where i discovered them.
felix soon learned that the treacherous turk, for whom he and his family endured such unheardof oppression, on discovering that his deliverer was thus reduced to poverty and ruin, became a traitor to good feeling and honour and had quitted italy with his daughter, insultingly sending felix a pittance of money to aid him, as he said, in some plan of future maintenance.
such were the events that preyed on the heart of felix and rendered him, when i first saw him, the most miserable of his family.
he could have endured poverty, and while this distress had been the meed of his virtue, he gloried in it; but the ingratitude of the turk and the loss of his beloved safie were misfortunes more bitter and irreparable.
the arrival of the arabian now infused new life into his soul.
when the news reached leghorn that felix was deprived of his wealth and rank, the merchant commanded his daughter to think no more of her lover, but to prepare to return to her native country.
the generous nature of safie was outraged by this command; she attempted to expostulate with her father, but he left her angrily, reiterating his tyrannical mandate.
a few days after, the turk entered his daughters apartment and told her hastily that he had reason to believe that his residence at leghorn had been divulged and that he should speedily be delivered up to the french government; he had consequently hired a vessel to convey him to constantinople, for which city he should sail in a few hours.
he intended to leave his daughter under the care of a confidential servant, to follow at her leisure with the greater part of his property, which had not yet arrived at leghorn.
when alone, safie resolved in her own mind the plan of conduct that it would become her to pursue in this emergency.
a residence in turkey was abhorrent to her; her religion and her feelings were alike averse to it.
by some papers of her father which fell into her hands she heard of the exile of her lover and learnt the name of the spot where he then resided.
she hesitated some time, but at length she formed her determination.
taking with her some jewels that belonged to her and a sum of money, she quitted italy with an attendant, a native of leghorn, but who understood the common language of turkey, and departed for germany.
she arrived in safety at a town about twenty leagues from the cottage of de lacey, when her attendant fell dangerously ill. safie nursed her with the most devoted affection, but the poor girl died, and the arabian was left alone, unacquainted with the language of the country and utterly ignorant of the customs of the world.
she fell, however, into good hands.
the italian had mentioned the name of the spot for which they were bound, and after her death the woman of the house in which they had lived took care that safie should arrive in safety at the cottage of her lover.
chapter 15 such was the history of my beloved cottagers.
it impressed me deeply.
i learned, from the views of social life which it developed, to admire their virtues and to deprecate the vices of mankind.
as yet i looked upon crime as a distant evil, benevolence and generosity were ever present before me, inciting within me a desire to become an actor in the busy scene where so many admirable qualities were called forth and displayed.
but in giving an account of the progress of my intellect, i must not omit a circumstance which occurred in the beginning of the month of august of the same year.
one night during my accustomed visit to the neighbouring wood where i collected my own food and brought home firing for my protectors, i found on the ground a leathern portmanteau containing several articles of dress and some books.
i eagerly seized the prize and returned with it to my hovel.
fortunately the books were written in the language, the elements of which i had acquired at the cottage; they consisted of paradise lost, a volume of plutarchs lives, and the sorrows of werter.
the possession of these treasures gave me extreme delight; i now continually studied and exercised my mind upon these histories, whilst my friends were employed in their ordinary occupations.
i can hardly describe to you the effect of these books.
they produced in me an infinity of new images and feelings, that sometimes raised me to ecstasy, but more frequently sunk me into the lowest dejection.
in the sorrows of werter, besides the interest of its simple and affecting story, so many opinions are canvassed and so many lights thrown upon what had hitherto been to me obscure subjects that i found in it a neverending source of speculation and astonishment.
the gentle and domestic manners it described, combined with lofty sentiments and feelings, which had for their object something out of self, accorded well with my experience among my protectors and with the wants which were for ever alive in my own bosom.
but i thought werter himself a more divine being than i had ever beheld or imagined; his character contained no pretension, but it sank deep.
the disquisitions upon death and suicide were calculated to fill me with wonder.
i did not pretend to enter into the merits of the case, yet i inclined towards the opinions of the hero, whose extinction i wept, without precisely understanding it.
as i read, however, i applied much personally to my own feelings and condition.
i found myself similar yet at the same time strangely unlike to the beings concerning whom i read and to whose conversation i was a listener.
i sympathised with and partly understood them, but i was unformed in mind; i was dependent on none and related to none.
the path of my departure was free, and there was none to lament my annihilation.
my person was hideous and my stature gigantic.
what did this mean?
who was i?
what was i?
whence did i come?
what was my destination?
these questions continually recurred, but i was unable to solve them.
the volume of plutarchs lives which i possessed contained the histories of the first founders of the ancient republics.
this book had a far different effect upon me from the sorrows of werter.
i learned from werters imaginations despondency and gloom, but plutarch taught me high thoughts; he elevated me above the wretched sphere of my own reflections, to admire and love the heroes of past ages.
many things i read surpassed my understanding and experience.
i had a very confused knowledge of kingdoms, wide extents of country, mighty rivers, and boundless seas.
but i was perfectly unacquainted with towns and large assemblages of men.
the cottage of my protectors had been the only school in which i had studied human nature, but this book developed new and mightier scenes of action.
i read of men concerned in public affairs, governing or massacring their species.
i felt the greatest ardour for virtue rise within me, and abhorrence for vice, as far as i understood the signification of those terms, relative as they were, as i applied them, to pleasure and pain alone.
induced by these feelings, i was of course led to admire peaceable lawgivers, numa, solon, and lycurgus, in preference to romulus and theseus.
the patriarchal lives of my protectors caused these impressions to take a firm hold on my mind; perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had been made by a young soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, i should have been imbued with different sensations.
but paradise lost excited different and far deeper emotions.
i read it, as i had read the other volumes which had fallen into my hands, as a true history.
it moved every feeling of wonder and awe that the picture of an omnipotent god warring with his creatures was capable of exciting.
i often referred the several situations, as their similarity struck me, to my own.
like adam, i was apparently united by no link to any other being in existence; but his state was far different from mine in every other respect.
he had come forth from the hands of god a perfect creature, happy and prosperous, guarded by the especial care of his creator; he was allowed to converse with and acquire knowledge from beings of a superior nature, but i was wretched, helpless, and alone.
many times i considered satan as the fitter emblem of my condition, for often, like him, when i viewed the bliss of my protectors, the bitter gall of envy rose within me.
another circumstance strengthened and confirmed these feelings.
soon after my arrival in the hovel i discovered some papers in the pocket of the dress which i had taken from your laboratory.
at first i had neglected them, but now that i was able to decipher the characters in which they were written, i began to study them with diligence.
it was your journal of the four months that preceded my creation.
you minutely described in these papers every step you took in the progress of your work; this history was mingled with accounts of domestic occurrences.
you doubtless recollect these papers.
here they are.
everything is related in them which bears reference to my accursed origin; the whole detail of that series of disgusting circumstances which produced it is set in view; the minutest description of my odious and loathsome person is given, in language which painted your own horrors and rendered mine indelible.
i sickened as i read.
hateful day when i received life!
i exclaimed in agony.
accursed creator!
why did you form a monster so hideous that even you turned from me in disgust?
god, in pity, made man beautiful and alluring, after his own image; but my form is a filthy type of yours, more horrid even from the very resemblance.
satan had his companions, fellow devils, to admire and encourage him, but i am solitary and abhorred.
these were the reflections of my hours of despondency and solitude; but when i contemplated the virtues of the cottagers, their amiable and benevolent dispositions, i persuaded myself that when they should become acquainted with my admiration of their virtues they would compassionate me and overlook my personal deformity.
could they turn from their door one, however monstrous, who solicited their compassion and friendship?
i resolved, at least, not to despair, but in every way to fit myself for an interview with them which would decide my fate.
i postponed this attempt for some months longer, for the importance attached to its success inspired me with a dread lest i should fail.
besides, i found that my understanding improved so much with every days experience that i was unwilling to commence this undertaking until a few more months should have added to my sagacity.
several changes, in the meantime, took place in the cottage.
the presence of safie diffused happiness among its inhabitants, and i also found that a greater degree of plenty reigned there.
felix and agatha spent more time in amusement and conversation, and were assisted in their labours by servants.
they did not appear rich, but they were contented and happy; their feelings were serene and peaceful, while mine became every day more tumultuous.
increase of knowledge only discovered to me more clearly what a wretched outcast i was.
i cherished hope, it is true, but it vanished when i beheld my person reflected in water or my shadow in the moonshine, even as that frail image and that inconstant shade.
i endeavoured to crush these fears and to fortify myself for the trial which in a few months i resolved to undergo; and sometimes i allowed my thoughts, unchecked by reason, to ramble in the fields of paradise, and dared to fancy amiable and lovely creatures sympathising with my feelings and cheering my gloom; their angelic countenances breathed smiles of consolation.
but it was all a dream; no eve soothed my sorrows nor shared my thoughts; i was alone.
i remembered adams supplication to his creator.
but where was mine?
he had abandoned me, and in the bitterness of my heart i cursed him.
autumn passed thus.
i saw, with surprise and grief, the leaves decay and fall, and nature again assume the barren and bleak appearance it had worn when i first beheld the woods and the lovely moon.
yet i did not heed the bleakness of the weather; i was better fitted by my conformation for the endurance of cold than heat.
but my chief delights were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all the gay apparel of summer; when those deserted me, i turned with more attention towards the cottagers.
their happiness was not decreased by the absence of summer.
they loved and sympathised with one another; and their joys, depending on each other, were not interrupted by the casualties that took place around them.
the more i saw of them, the greater became my desire to claim their protection and kindness; my heart yearned to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see their sweet looks directed towards me with affection was the utmost limit of my ambition.
i dared not think that they would turn them from me with disdain and horror.
the poor that stopped at their door were never driven away.
i asked, it is true, for greater treasures than a little food or rest: i required kindness and sympathy; but i did not believe myself utterly unworthy of it.
the winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken place since i awoke into life.
my attention at this time was solely directed towards my plan of introducing myself into the cottage of my protectors.
i revolved many projects, but that on which i finally fixed was to enter the dwelling when the blind old man should be alone.
i had sagacity enough to discover that the unnatural hideousness of my person was the chief object of horror with those who had formerly beheld me.
my voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible in it; i thought, therefore, that if in the absence of his children i could gain the good will and mediation of the old de lacey, i might by his means be tolerated by my younger protectors.
one day, when the sun shone on the red leaves that strewed the ground and diffused cheerfulness, although it denied warmth, safie, agatha, and felix departed on a long country walk, and the old man, at his own desire, was left alone in the cottage.
when his children had departed, he took up his guitar and played several mournful but sweet airs, more sweet and mournful than i had ever heard him play before.
at first his countenance was illuminated with pleasure, but as he continued, thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded; at length, laying aside the instrument, he sat absorbed in reflection.
my heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of trial, which would decide my hopes or realise my fears.
the servants were gone to a neighbouring fair.
all was silent in and around the cottage; it was an excellent opportunity; yet, when i proceeded to execute my plan, my limbs failed me and i sank to the ground.
again i rose, and exerting all the firmness of which i was master, removed the planks which i had placed before my hovel to conceal my retreat.
the fresh air revived me, and with renewed determination i approached the door of their cottage.
i knocked.
who is there?
said the old man.
come in.
i entered.
pardon this intrusion, said i; i am a traveller in want of a little rest; you would greatly oblige me if you would allow me to remain a few minutes before the fire.
enter, said de lacey, and i will try in what manner i can to relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are from home, and as i am blind, i am afraid i shall find it difficult to procure food for you.
do not trouble yourself, my kind host; i have food; it is warmth and rest only that i need.
i sat down, and a silence ensued.
i knew that every minute was precious to me, yet i remained irresolute in what manner to commence the interview, when the old man addressed me.
by your language, stranger, i suppose you are my countryman; are you french?
no; but i was educated by a french family and understand that language only.
i am now going to claim the protection of some friends, whom i sincerely love, and of whose favour i have some hopes.
are they germans?
no, they are french.
but let us change the subject.
i am an unfortunate and deserted creature, i look around and i have no relation or friend upon earth.
these amiable people to whom i go have never seen me and know little of me.
i am full of fears, for if i fail there, i am an outcast in the world for ever.
do not despair.
to be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate, but the hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any obvious selfinterest, are full of brotherly love and charity.
rely, therefore, on your hopes; and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.
they are kindthey are the most excellent creatures in the world; but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against me.
i have good dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree beneficial; but a fatal prejudice clouds their eyes, and where they ought to see a feeling and kind friend, they behold only a detestable monster.
that is indeed unfortunate; but if you are really blameless, cannot you undeceive them?
i am about to undertake that task; and it is on that account that i feel so many overwhelming terrors.
i tenderly love these friends; i have, unknown to them, been for many months in the habits of daily kindness towards them; but they believe that i wish to injure them, and it is that prejudice which i wish to overcome.
where do these friends reside?
near this spot.
the old man paused and then continued, if you will unreservedly confide to me the particulars of your tale, i perhaps may be of use in undeceiving them.
i am blind and cannot judge of your countenance, but there is something in your words which persuades me that you are sincere.
i am poor and an exile, but it will afford me true pleasure to be in any way serviceable to a human creature.
excellent man!
i thank you and accept your generous offer.
you raise me from the dust by this kindness; and i trust that, by your aid, i shall not be driven from the society and sympathy of your fellow creatures.
heaven forbid!
even if you were really criminal, for that can only drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to virtue.
i also am unfortunate; i and my family have been condemned, although innocent; judge, therefore, if i do not feel for your misfortunes.
how can i thank you, my best and only benefactor?
from your lips first have i heard the voice of kindness directed towards me; i shall be for ever grateful; and your present humanity assures me of success with those friends whom i am on the point of meeting.
may i know the names and residence of those friends?
i paused.
this, i thought, was the moment of decision, which was to rob me of or bestow happiness on me for ever.
i struggled vainly for firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all my remaining strength; i sank on the chair and sobbed aloud.
at that moment i heard the steps of my younger protectors.
i had not a moment to lose, but seizing the hand of the old man, i cried, now is the time!
save and protect me!
you and your family are the friends whom i seek.
do not you desert me in the hour of trial!
great god!
exclaimed the old man.
who are you?
at that instant the cottage door was opened, and felix, safie, and agatha entered.
who can describe their horror and consternation on beholding me?
agatha fainted, and safie, unable to attend to her friend, rushed out of the cottage.
felix darted forward, and with supernatural force tore me from his father, to whose knees i clung, in a transport of fury, he dashed me to the ground and struck me violently with a stick.
i could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion rends the antelope.
but my heart sank within me as with bitter sickness, and i refrained.
i saw him on the point of repeating his blow, when, overcome by pain and anguish, i quitted the cottage, and in the general tumult escaped unperceived to my hovel.
chapter 16 cursed, cursed creator!
why did i live?
why, in that instant, did i not extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly bestowed?
i know not; despair had not yet taken possession of me; my feelings were those of rage and revenge.
i could with pleasure have destroyed the cottage and its inhabitants and have glutted myself with their shrieks and misery.
when night came i quitted my retreat and wandered in the wood; and now, no longer restrained by the fear of discovery, i gave vent to my anguish in fearful howlings.
i was like a wild beast that had broken the toils, destroying the objects that obstructed me and ranging through the wood with a staglike swiftness.
oh!
what a miserable night i passed!
the cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees waved their branches above me; now and then the sweet voice of a bird burst forth amidst the universal stillness.
all, save i, were at rest or in enjoyment; i, like the archfiend, bore a hell within me, and finding myself unsympathised with, wished to tear up the trees, spread havoc and destruction around me, and then to have sat down and enjoyed the ruin.
but this was a luxury of sensation that could not endure; i became fatigued with excess of bodily exertion and sank on the damp grass in the sick impotence of despair.
there was none among the myriads of men that existed who would pity or assist me; and should i feel kindness towards my enemies?
no; from that moment i declared everlasting war against the species, and more than all, against him who had formed me and sent me forth to this insupportable misery.
the sun rose; i heard the voices of men and knew that it was impossible to return to my retreat during that day.
accordingly i hid myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the ensuing hours to reflection on my situation.
the pleasant sunshine and the pure air of day restored me to some degree of tranquillity; and when i considered what had passed at the cottage, i could not help believing that i had been too hasty in my conclusions.
i had certainly acted imprudently.
it was apparent that my conversation had interested the father in my behalf, and i was a fool in having exposed my person to the horror of his children.
i ought to have familiarised the old de lacey to me, and by degrees to have discovered myself to the rest of his family, when they should have been prepared for my approach.
but i did not believe my errors to be irretrievable, and after much consideration i resolved to return to the cottage, seek the old man, and by my representations win him to my party.
these thoughts calmed me, and in the afternoon i sank into a profound sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to be visited by peaceful dreams.
the horrible scene of the preceding day was for ever acting before my eyes; the females were flying and the enraged felix tearing me from his fathers feet.
i awoke exhausted, and finding that it was already night, i crept forth from my hidingplace, and went in search of food.
when my hunger was appeased, i directed my steps towards the wellknown path that conducted to the cottage.
all there was at peace.
i crept into my hovel and remained in silent expectation of the accustomed hour when the family arose.
that hour passed, the sun mounted high in the heavens, but the cottagers did not appear.
i trembled violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune.
the inside of the cottage was dark, and i heard no motion; i cannot describe the agony of this suspense.
presently two countrymen passed by, but pausing near the cottage, they entered into conversation, using violent gesticulations; but i did not understand what they said, as they spoke the language of the country, which differed from that of my protectors.
soon after, however, felix approached with another man; i was surprised, as i knew that he had not quitted the cottage that morning, and waited anxiously to discover from his discourse the meaning of these unusual appearances.
do you consider, said his companion to him, that you will be obliged to pay three months rent and to lose the produce of your garden?
i do not wish to take any unfair advantage, and i beg therefore that you will take some days to consider of your determination.
it is utterly useless, replied felix; we can never again inhabit your cottage.
the life of my father is in the greatest danger, owing to the dreadful circumstance that i have related.
my wife and my sister will never recover from their horror.
i entreat you not to reason with me any more.
take possession of your tenement and let me fly from this place.
felix trembled violently as he said this.
he and his companion entered the cottage, in which they remained for a few minutes, and then departed.
i never saw any of the family of de lacey more.
i continued for the remainder of the day in my hovel in a state of utter and stupid despair.
my protectors had departed and had broken the only link that held me to the world.
for the first time the feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and i did not strive to control them, but allowing myself to be borne away by the stream, i bent my mind towards injury and death.
when i thought of my friends, of the mild voice of de lacey, the gentle eyes of agatha, and the exquisite beauty of the arabian, these thoughts vanished and a gush of tears somewhat soothed me.
but again when i reflected that they had spurned and deserted me, anger returned, a rage of anger, and unable to injure anything human, i turned my fury towards inanimate objects.
as night advanced, i placed a variety of combustibles around the cottage, and after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden, i waited with forced impatience until the moon had sunk to commence my operations.
as the night advanced, a fierce wind arose from the woods and quickly dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens; the blast tore along like a mighty avalanche and produced a kind of insanity in my spirits that burst all bounds of reason and reflection.
i lighted the dry branch of a tree and danced with fury around the devoted cottage, my eyes still fixed on the western horizon, the edge of which the moon nearly touched.
a part of its orb was at length hid, and i waved my brand; it sank, and with a loud scream i fired the straw, and heath, and bushes, which i had collected.
the wind fanned the fire, and the cottage was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to it and licked it with their forked and destroying tongues.
as soon as i was convinced that no assistance could save any part of the habitation, i quitted the scene and sought for refuge in the woods.
and now, with the world before me, whither should i bend my steps?
i resolved to fly far from the scene of my misfortunes; but to me, hated and despised, every country must be equally horrible.
at length the thought of you crossed my mind.
i learned from your papers that you were my father, my creator; and to whom could i apply with more fitness than to him who had given me life?
among the lessons that felix had bestowed upon safie, geography had not been omitted; i had learned from these the relative situations of the different countries of the earth.
you had mentioned geneva as the name of your native town, and towards this place i resolved to proceed.
but how was i to direct myself?
i knew that i must travel in a southwesterly direction to reach my destination, but the sun was my only guide.
i did not know the names of the towns that i was to pass through, nor could i ask information from a single human being; but i did not despair.
from you only could i hope for succour, although towards you i felt no sentiment but that of hatred.
unfeeling, heartless creator!
you had endowed me with perceptions and passions and then cast me abroad an object for the scorn and horror of mankind.
but on you only had i any claim for pity and redress, and from you i determined to seek that justice which i vainly attempted to gain from any other being that wore the human form.
my travels were long and the sufferings i endured intense.
it was late in autumn when i quitted the district where i had so long resided.
i travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of a human being.
nature decayed around me, and the sun became heatless; rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface of the earth was hard and chill, and bare, and i found no shelter.
oh, earth!
how often did i imprecate curses on the cause of my being!
the mildness of my nature had fled, and all within me was turned to gall and bitterness.
the nearer i approached to your habitation, the more deeply did i feel the spirit of revenge enkindled in my heart.
snow fell, and the waters were hardened, but i rested not.
a few incidents now and then directed me, and i possessed a map of the country; but i often wandered wide from my path.
the agony of my feelings allowed me no respite; no incident occurred from which my rage and misery could not extract its food; but a circumstance that happened when i arrived on the confines of switzerland, when the sun had recovered its warmth and the earth again began to look green, confirmed in an especial manner the bitterness and horror of my feelings.
i generally rested during the day and travelled only when i was secured by night from the view of man.
one morning, however, finding that my path lay through a deep wood, i ventured to continue my journey after the sun had risen; the day, which was one of the first of spring, cheered even me by the loveliness of its sunshine and the balminess of the air.
i felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure, that had long appeared dead, revive within me.
half surprised by the novelty of these sensations, i allowed myself to be borne away by them, and forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy.
soft tears again bedewed my cheeks, and i even raised my humid eyes with thankfulness towards the blessed sun, which bestowed such joy upon me.
i continued to wind among the paths of the wood, until i came to its boundary, which was skirted by a deep and rapid river, into which many of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring.
here i paused, not exactly knowing what path to pursue, when i heard the sound of voices, that induced me to conceal myself under the shade of a cypress.
i was scarcely hid when a young girl came running towards the spot where i was concealed, laughing, as if she ran from someone in sport.
she continued her course along the precipitous sides of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into the rapid stream.
i rushed from my hidingplace and with extreme labour, from the force of the current, saved her and dragged her to shore.
she was senseless, and i endeavoured by every means in my power to restore animation, when i was suddenly interrupted by the approach of a rustic, who was probably the person from whom she had playfully fled.
on seeing me, he darted towards me, and tearing the girl from my arms, hastened towards the deeper parts of the wood.
i followed speedily, i hardly knew why; but when the man saw me draw near, he aimed a gun, which he carried, at my body and fired.
i sank to the ground, and my injurer, with increased swiftness, escaped into the wood.
this was then the reward of my benevolence!
i had saved a human being from destruction, and as a recompense i now writhed under the miserable pain of a wound which shattered the flesh and bone.
the feelings of kindness and gentleness which i had entertained but a few moments before gave place to hellish rage and gnashing of teeth.
inflamed by pain, i vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all mankind.
but the agony of my wound overcame me; my pulses paused, and i fainted.
for some weeks i led a miserable life in the woods, endeavouring to cure the wound which i had received.
the ball had entered my shoulder, and i knew not whether it had remained there or passed through; at any rate i had no means of extracting it.
my sufferings were augmented also by the oppressive sense of the injustice and ingratitude of their infliction.
my daily vows rose for revengea deep and deadly revenge, such as would alone compensate for the outrages and anguish i had endured.
after some weeks my wound healed, and i continued my journey.
the labours i endured were no longer to be alleviated by the bright sun or gentle breezes of spring; all joy was but a mockery which insulted my desolate state and made me feel more painfully that i was not made for the enjoyment of pleasure.
but my toils now drew near a close, and in two months from this time i reached the environs of geneva.
it was evening when i arrived, and i retired to a hidingplace among the fields that surround it to meditate in what manner i should apply to you.
i was oppressed by fatigue and hunger and far too unhappy to enjoy the gentle breezes of evening or the prospect of the sun setting behind the stupendous mountains of jura.
at this time a slight sleep relieved me from the pain of reflection, which was disturbed by the approach of a beautiful child, who came running into the recess i had chosen, with all the sportiveness of infancy.
suddenly, as i gazed on him, an idea seized me that this little creature was unprejudiced and had lived too short a time to have imbibed a horror of deformity.
if, therefore, i could seize him and educate him as my companion and friend, i should not be so desolate in this peopled earth.
urged by this impulse, i seized on the boy as he passed and drew him towards me.
as soon as he beheld my form, he placed his hands before his eyes and uttered a shrill scream; i drew his hand forcibly from his face and said, child, what is the meaning of this?
i do not intend to hurt you; listen to me.
he struggled violently.
let me go, he cried; monster!
ugly wretch!
you wish to eat me and tear me to pieces.
you are an ogre.
let me go, or i will tell my papa.
boy, you will never see your father again; you must come with me.
hideous monster!
let me go.
my papa is a syndiche is m. frankensteinhe will punish you.
you dare not keep me.
frankenstein!
you belong then to my enemyto him towards whom i have sworn eternal revenge; you shall be my first victim.
the child still struggled and loaded me with epithets which carried despair to my heart; i grasped his throat to silence him, and in a moment he lay dead at my feet.
i gazed on my victim, and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish triumph; clapping my hands, i exclaimed, i too can create desolation; my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and a thousand other miseries shall torment and destroy him.
as i fixed my eyes on the child, i saw something glittering on his breast.
i took it; it was a portrait of a most lovely woman.
in spite of my malignity, it softened and attracted me.
for a few moments i gazed with delight on her dark eyes, fringed by deep lashes, and her lovely lips; but presently my rage returned; i remembered that i was for ever deprived of the delights that such beautiful creatures could bestow and that she whose resemblance i contemplated would, in regarding me, have changed that air of divine benignity to one expressive of disgust and affright.
can you wonder that such thoughts transported me with rage?
i only wonder that at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in exclamations and agony, i did not rush among mankind and perish in the attempt to destroy them.
while i was overcome by these feelings, i left the spot where i had committed the murder, and seeking a more secluded hidingplace, i entered a barn which had appeared to me to be empty.
a woman was sleeping on some straw; she was young, not indeed so beautiful as her whose portrait i held, but of an agreeable aspect and blooming in the loveliness of youth and health.
here, i thought, is one of those whose joyimparting smiles are bestowed on all but me.
and then i bent over her and whispered, awake, fairest, thy lover is nearhe who would give his life but to obtain one look of affection from thine eyes; my beloved, awake!
the sleeper stirred; a thrill of terror ran through me.
should she indeed awake, and see me, and curse me, and denounce the murderer?
thus would she assuredly act if her darkened eyes opened and she beheld me.
the thought was madness; it stirred the fiend within menot i, but she, shall suffer; the murder i have committed because i am for ever robbed of all that she could give me, she shall atone.
the crime had its source in her; be hers the punishment!
thanks to the lessons of felix and the sanguinary laws of man, i had learned now to work mischief.
i bent over her and placed the portrait securely in one of the folds of her dress.
she moved again, and i fled.
for some days i haunted the spot where these scenes had taken place, sometimes wishing to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the world and its miseries for ever.
at length i wandered towards these mountains, and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning passion which you alone can gratify.
we may not part until you have promised to comply with my requisition.
i am alone and miserable; man will not associate with me; but one as deformed and horrible as myself would not deny herself to me.
my companion must be of the same species and have the same defects.
this being you must create.
chapter 17 the being finished speaking and fixed his looks upon me in the expectation of a reply.
but i was bewildered, perplexed, and unable to arrange my ideas sufficiently to understand the full extent of his proposition.
he continued, you must create a female for me with whom i can live in the interchange of those sympathies necessary for my being.
this you alone can do, and i demand it of you as a right which you must not refuse to concede.
the latter part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that had died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and as he said this i could no longer suppress the rage that burned within me.
i do refuse it, i replied; and no torture shall ever extort a consent from me.
you may render me the most miserable of men, but you shall never make me base in my own eyes.
shall i create another like yourself, whose joint wickedness might desolate the world.
begone!
i have answered you; you may torture me, but i will never consent.
you are in the wrong, replied the fiend; and instead of threatening, i am content to reason with you.
i am malicious because i am miserable.
am i not shunned and hated by all mankind?
you, my creator, would tear me to pieces and triumph; remember that, and tell me why i should pity man more than he pities me?
you would not call it murder if you could precipitate me into one of those icerifts and destroy my frame, the work of your own hands.
shall i respect man when he condemns me?
let him live with me in the interchange of kindness, and instead of injury i would bestow every benefit upon him with tears of gratitude at his acceptance.
but that cannot be; the human senses are insurmountable barriers to our union.
yet mine shall not be the submission of abject slavery.
i will revenge my injuries; if i cannot inspire love, i will cause fear, and chiefly towards you my archenemy, because my creator, do i swear inextinguishable hatred.
have a care; i will work at your destruction, nor finish until i desolate your heart, so that you shall curse the hour of your birth.
a fiendish rage animated him as he said this; his face was wrinkled into contortions too horrible for human eyes to behold; but presently he calmed himself and proceeded i intended to reason.
this passion is detrimental to me, for you do not reflect that you are the cause of its excess.
if any being felt emotions of benevolence towards me, i should return them a hundred and a hundredfold; for that one creatures sake i would make peace with the whole kind!
but i now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be realised.
what i ask of you is reasonable and moderate; i demand a creature of another sex, but as hideous as myself; the gratification is small, but it is all that i can receive, and it shall content me.
it is true, we shall be monsters, cut off from all the world; but on that account we shall be more attached to one another.
our lives will not be happy, but they will be harmless and free from the misery i now feel.
oh!
my creator, make me happy; let me feel gratitude towards you for one benefit!
let me see that i excite the sympathy of some existing thing; do not deny me my request!
i was moved.
i shuddered when i thought of the possible consequences of my consent, but i felt that there was some justice in his argument.
his tale and the feelings he now expressed proved him to be a creature of fine sensations, and did i not as his maker owe him all the portion of happiness that it was in my power to bestow?
he saw my change of feeling and continued, if you consent, neither you nor any other human being shall ever see us again; i will go to the vast wilds of south america.
my food is not that of man; i do not destroy the lamb and the kid to glut my appetite; acorns and berries afford me sufficient nourishment.
my companion will be of the same nature as myself and will be content with the same fare.
we shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun will shine on us as on man and will ripen our food.
the picture i present to you is peaceful and human, and you must feel that you could deny it only in the wantonness of power and cruelty.
pitiless as you have been towards me, i now see compassion in your eyes; let me seize the favourable moment and persuade you to promise what i so ardently desire.
you propose, replied i, to fly from the habitations of man, to dwell in those wilds where the beasts of the field will be your only companions.
how can you, who long for the love and sympathy of man, persevere in this exile?
you will return and again seek their kindness, and you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions will be renewed, and you will then have a companion to aid you in the task of destruction.
this may not be; cease to argue the point, for i cannot consent.
how inconstant are your feelings!
but a moment ago you were moved by my representations, and why do you again harden yourself to my complaints?
i swear to you, by the earth which i inhabit, and by you that made me, that with the companion you bestow, i will quit the neighbourhood of man and dwell, as it may chance, in the most savage of places.
my evil passions will have fled, for i shall meet with sympathy!
my life will flow quietly away, and in my dying moments i shall not curse my maker.
his words had a strange effect upon me.
i compassionated him and sometimes felt a wish to console him, but when i looked upon him, when i saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sickened and my feelings were altered to those of horror and hatred.
i tried to stifle these sensations; i thought that as i could not sympathise with him, i had no right to withhold from him the small portion of happiness which was yet in my power to bestow.
you swear, i said, to be harmless; but have you not already shown a degree of malice that should reasonably make me distrust you?
may not even this be a feint that will increase your triumph by affording a wider scope for your revenge?
how is this?
i must not be trifled with, and i demand an answer.
if i have no ties and no affections, hatred and vice must be my portion; the love of another will destroy the cause of my crimes, and i shall become a thing of whose existence everyone will be ignorant.
my vices are the children of a forced solitude that i abhor, and my virtues will necessarily arise when i live in communion with an equal.
i shall feel the affections of a sensitive being and become linked to the chain of existence and events from which i am now excluded.
i paused some time to reflect on all he had related and the various arguments which he had employed.
i thought of the promise of virtues which he had displayed on the opening of his existence and the subsequent blight of all kindly feeling by the loathing and scorn which his protectors had manifested towards him.
his power and threats were not omitted in my calculations; a creature who could exist in the icecaves of the glaciers and hide himself from pursuit among the ridges of inaccessible precipices was a being possessing faculties it would be vain to cope with.
after a long pause of reflection i concluded that the justice due both to him and my fellow creatures demanded of me that i should comply with his request.
turning to him, therefore, i said, i consent to your demand, on your solemn oath to quit europe for ever, and every other place in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as i shall deliver into your hands a female who will accompany you in your exile.
i swear, he cried, by the sun, and by the blue sky of heaven, and by the fire of love that burns my heart, that if you grant my prayer, while they exist you shall never behold me again.
depart to your home and commence your labours; i shall watch their progress with unutterable anxiety; and fear not but that when you are ready i shall appear.
saying this, he suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in my sentiments.
i saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than the flight of an eagle, and quickly lost among the undulations of the sea of ice.
his tale had occupied the whole day, and the sun was upon the verge of the horizon when he departed.
i knew that i ought to hasten my descent towards the valley, as i should soon be encompassed in darkness; but my heart was heavy, and my steps slow.
the labour of winding among the little paths of the mountain and fixing my feet firmly as i advanced perplexed me, occupied as i was by the emotions which the occurrences of the day had produced.
night was far advanced when i came to the halfway restingplace and seated myself beside the fountain.
the stars shone at intervals as the clouds passed from over them; the dark pines rose before me, and every here and there a broken tree lay on the ground; it was a scene of wonderful solemnity and stirred strange thoughts within me.
i wept bitterly, and clasping my hands in agony, i exclaimed, oh!
stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to mock me; if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let me become as nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave me in darkness.
these were wild and miserable thoughts, but i cannot describe to you how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon me and how i listened to every blast of wind as if it were a dull ugly siroc on its way to consume me.
morning dawned before i arrived at the village of chamounix; i took no rest, but returned immediately to geneva.
even in my own heart i could give no expression to my sensationsthey weighed on me with a mountains weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them.
thus i returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the family.
my haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm, but i answered no question, scarcely did i speak.
i felt as if i were placed under a banas if i had no right to claim their sympathiesas if never more might i enjoy companionship with them.
yet even thus i loved them to adoration; and to save them, i resolved to dedicate myself to my most abhorred task.
the prospect of such an occupation made every other circumstance of existence pass before me like a dream, and that thought only had to me the reality of life.
chapter 18 day after day, week after week, passed away on my return to geneva; and i could not collect the courage to recommence my work.
i feared the vengeance of the disappointed fiend, yet i was unable to overcome my repugnance to the task which was enjoined me.
i found that i could not compose a female without again devoting several months to profound study and laborious disquisition.
i had heard of some discoveries having been made by an english philosopher, the knowledge of which was material to my success, and i sometimes thought of obtaining my fathers consent to visit england for this purpose; but i clung to every pretence of delay and shrank from taking the first step in an undertaking whose immediate necessity began to appear less absolute to me.
a change indeed had taken place in me; my health, which had hitherto declined, was now much restored; and my spirits, when unchecked by the memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportionably.
my father saw this change with pleasure, and he turned his thoughts towards the best method of eradicating the remains of my melancholy, which every now and then would return by fits, and with a devouring blackness overcast the approaching sunshine.
at these moments i took refuge in the most perfect solitude.
i passed whole days on the lake alone in a little boat, watching the clouds and listening to the rippling of the waves, silent and listless.
but the fresh air and bright sun seldom failed to restore me to some degree of composure, and on my return i met the salutations of my friends with a readier smile and a more cheerful heart.
it was after my return from one of these rambles that my father, calling me aside, thus addressed me, i am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have resumed your former pleasures and seem to be returning to yourself.
and yet you are still unhappy and still avoid our society.
for some time i was lost in conjecture as to the cause of this, but yesterday an idea struck me, and if it is well founded, i conjure you to avow it.
reserve on such a point would be not only useless, but draw down treble misery on us all.
i trembled violently at his exordium, and my father continued i confess, my son, that i have always looked forward to your marriage with our dear elizabeth as the tie of our domestic comfort and the stay of my declining years.
you were attached to each other from your earliest infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in dispositions and tastes, entirely suited to one another.
but so blind is the experience of man that what i conceived to be the best assistants to my plan may have entirely destroyed it.
you, perhaps, regard her as your sister, without any wish that she might become your wife.
nay, you may have met with another whom you may love; and considering yourself as bound in honour to elizabeth, this struggle may occasion the poignant misery which you appear to feel.
my dear father, reassure yourself.
i love my cousin tenderly and sincerely.
i never saw any woman who excited, as elizabeth does, my warmest admiration and affection.
my future hopes and prospects are entirely bound up in the expectation of our union.
the expression of your sentiments of this subject, my dear victor, gives me more pleasure than i have for some time experienced.
if you feel thus, we shall assuredly be happy, however present events may cast a gloom over us.
but it is this gloom which appears to have taken so strong a hold of your mind that i wish to dissipate.
tell me, therefore, whether you object to an immediate solemnisation of the marriage.
we have been unfortunate, and recent events have drawn us from that everyday tranquillity befitting my years and infirmities.
you are younger; yet i do not suppose, possessed as you are of a competent fortune, that an early marriage would at all interfere with any future plans of honour and utility that you may have formed.
do not suppose, however, that i wish to dictate happiness to you or that a delay on your part would cause me any serious uneasiness.
interpret my words with candour and answer me, i conjure you, with confidence and sincerity.
i listened to my father in silence and remained for some time incapable of offering any reply.
i revolved rapidly in my mind a multitude of thoughts and endeavoured to arrive at some conclusion.
alas!
to me the idea of an immediate union with my elizabeth was one of horror and dismay.
i was bound by a solemn promise which i had not yet fulfilled and dared not break, or if i did, what manifold miseries might not impend over me and my devoted family!
could i enter into a festival with this deadly weight yet hanging round my neck and bowing me to the ground?
i must perform my engagement and let the monster depart with his mate before i allowed myself to enjoy the delight of a union from which i expected peace.
i remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either journeying to england or entering into a long correspondence with those philosophers of that country whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable use to me in my present undertaking.
the latter method of obtaining the desired intelligence was dilatory and unsatisfactory; besides, i had an insurmountable aversion to the idea of engaging myself in my loathsome task in my fathers house while in habits of familiar intercourse with those i loved.
i knew that a thousand fearful accidents might occur, the slightest of which would disclose a tale to thrill all connected with me with horror.
i was aware also that i should often lose all selfcommand, all capacity of hiding the harrowing sensations that would possess me during the progress of my unearthly occupation.
i must absent myself from all i loved while thus employed.
once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and i might be restored to my family in peace and happiness.
my promise fulfilled, the monster would depart for ever.
or (so my fond fancy imaged) some accident might meanwhile occur to destroy him and put an end to my slavery for ever.
these feelings dictated my answer to my father.
i expressed a wish to visit england, but concealing the true reasons of this request, i clothed my desires under a guise which excited no suspicion, while i urged my desire with an earnestness that easily induced my father to comply.
after so long a period of an absorbing melancholy that resembled madness in its intensity and effects, he was glad to find that i was capable of taking pleasure in the idea of such a journey, and he hoped that change of scene and varied amusement would, before my return, have restored me entirely to myself.
the duration of my absence was left to my own choice; a few months, or at most a year, was the period contemplated.
one paternal kind precaution he had taken to ensure my having a companion.
without previously communicating with me, he had, in concert with elizabeth, arranged that clerval should join me at strasburgh.
this interfered with the solitude i coveted for the prosecution of my task; yet at the commencement of my journey the presence of my friend could in no way be an impediment, and truly i rejoiced that thus i should be saved many hours of lonely, maddening reflection.
nay, henry might stand between me and the intrusion of my foe.
if i were alone, would he not at times force his abhorred presence on me to remind me of my task or to contemplate its progress?
to england, therefore, i was bound, and it was understood that my union with elizabeth should take place immediately on my return.
my fathers age rendered him extremely averse to delay.
for myself, there was one reward i promised myself from my detested toilsone consolation for my unparalleled sufferings; it was the prospect of that day when, enfranchised from my miserable slavery, i might claim elizabeth and forget the past in my union with her.
i now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling haunted me which filled me with fear and agitation.
during my absence i should leave my friends unconscious of the existence of their enemy and unprotected from his attacks, exasperated as he might be by my departure.
but he had promised to follow me wherever i might go, and would he not accompany me to england?
this imagination was dreadful in itself, but soothing inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends.
i was agonised with the idea of the possibility that the reverse of this might happen.
but through the whole period during which i was the slave of my creature i allowed myself to be governed by the impulses of the moment; and my present sensations strongly intimated that the fiend would follow me and exempt my family from the danger of his machinations.
it was in the latter end of september that i again quitted my native country.
my journey had been my own suggestion, and elizabeth therefore acquiesced, but she was filled with disquiet at the idea of my suffering, away from her, the inroads of misery and grief.
it had been her care which provided me a companion in clervaland yet a man is blind to a thousand minute circumstances which call forth a womans sedulous attention.
she longed to bid me hasten my return; a thousand conflicting emotions rendered her mute as she bade me a tearful, silent farewell.
i threw myself into the carriage that was to convey me away, hardly knowing whither i was going, and careless of what was passing around.
i remembered only, and it was with a bitter anguish that i reflected on it, to order that my chemical instruments should be packed to go with me.
filled with dreary imaginations, i passed through many beautiful and majestic scenes, but my eyes were fixed and unobserving.
i could only think of the bourne of my travels and the work which was to occupy me whilst they endured.
after some days spent in listless indolence, during which i traversed many leagues, i arrived at strasburgh, where i waited two days for clerval.
he came.
alas, how great was the contrast between us!
he was alive to every new scene, joyful when he saw the beauties of the setting sun, and more happy when he beheld it rise and recommence a new day.
he pointed out to me the shifting colours of the landscape and the appearances of the sky.
this is what it is to live, he cried; now i enjoy existence!
but you, my dear frankenstein, wherefore are you desponding and sorrowful!
in truth, i was occupied by gloomy thoughts and neither saw the descent of the evening star nor the golden sunrise reflected in the rhine.
and you, my friend, would be far more amused with the journal of clerval, who observed the scenery with an eye of feeling and delight, than in listening to my reflections.
i, a miserable wretch, haunted by a curse that shut up every avenue to enjoyment.
we had agreed to descend the rhine in a boat from strasburgh to rotterdam, whence we might take shipping for london.
during this voyage we passed many willowy islands and saw several beautiful towns.
we stayed a day at mannheim, and on the fifth from our departure from strasburgh, arrived at mainz.
the course of the rhine below mainz becomes much more picturesque.
the river descends rapidly and winds between hills, not high, but steep, and of beautiful forms.
we saw many ruined castles standing on the edges of precipices, surrounded by black woods, high and inaccessible.
this part of the rhine, indeed, presents a singularly variegated landscape.
in one spot you view rugged hills, ruined castles overlooking tremendous precipices, with the dark rhine rushing beneath; and on the sudden turn of a promontory, flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river and populous towns occupy the scene.
we travelled at the time of the vintage and heard the song of the labourers as we glided down the stream.
even i, depressed in mind, and my spirits continually agitated by gloomy feelings, even i was pleased.
i lay at the bottom of the boat, and as i gazed on the cloudless blue sky, i seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which i had long been a stranger.
and if these were my sensations, who can describe those of henry?
he felt as if he had been transported to fairyland and enjoyed a happiness seldom tasted by man.
i have seen, he said, the most beautiful scenes of my own country; i have visited the lakes of lucerne and uri, where the snowy mountains descend almost perpendicularly to the water, casting black and impenetrable shades, which would cause a gloomy and mournful appearance were it not for the most verdant islands that relieve the eye by their gay appearance; i have seen this lake agitated by a tempest, when the wind tore up whirlwinds of water and gave you an idea of what the waterspout must be on the great ocean; and the waves dash with fury the base of the mountain, where the priest and his mistress were overwhelmed by an avalanche and where their dying voices are still said to be heard amid the pauses of the nightly wind; i have seen the mountains of la valais, and the pays de vaud; but this country, victor, pleases me more than all those wonders.
the mountains of switzerland are more majestic and strange, but there is a charm in the banks of this divine river that i never before saw equalled.
look at that castle which overhangs yon precipice; and that also on the island, almost concealed amongst the foliage of those lovely trees; and now that group of labourers coming from among their vines; and that village half hid in the recess of the mountain.
oh, surely the spirit that inhabits and guards this place has a soul more in harmony with man than those who pile the glacier or retire to the inaccessible peaks of the mountains of our own country.
clerval!
beloved friend!
even now it delights me to record your words and to dwell on the praise of which you are so eminently deserving.
he was a being formed in the very poetry of nature.
his wild and enthusiastic imagination was chastened by the sensibility of his heart.
his soul overflowed with ardent affections, and his friendship was of that devoted and wondrous nature that the worldlyminded teach us to look for only in the imagination.
but even human sympathies were not sufficient to satisfy his eager mind.
the scenery of external nature, which others regard only with admiration, he loved with ardour: the sounding cataract haunted him like a passion: the tall rock, the mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood, their colours and their forms, were then to him an appetite; a feeling, and a love, that had no need of a remoter charm, by thought supplied, or any interest unborrowd from the eye.
wordsworths tintern abbey.
and where does he now exist?
is this gentle and lovely being lost for ever?
has this mind, so replete with ideas, imaginations fanciful and magnificent, which formed a world, whose existence depended on the life of its creator;has this mind perished?
does it now only exist in my memory?
no, it is not thus; your form so divinely wrought, and beaming with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still visits and consoles your unhappy friend.
pardon this gush of sorrow; these ineffectual words are but a slight tribute to the unexampled worth of henry, but they soothe my heart, overflowing with the anguish which his remembrance creates.
i will proceed with my tale.
beyond cologne we descended to the plains of holland; and we resolved to post the remainder of our way, for the wind was contrary and the stream of the river was too gentle to aid us.
our journey here lost the interest arising from beautiful scenery, but we arrived in a few days at rotterdam, whence we proceeded by sea to england.
it was on a clear morning, in the latter days of december, that i first saw the white cliffs of britain.
the banks of the thames presented a new scene; they were flat but fertile, and almost every town was marked by the remembrance of some story.
we saw tilbury fort and remembered the spanish armada, gravesend, woolwich, and greenwichplaces which i had heard of even in my country.
at length we saw the numerous steeples of london, st. pauls towering above all, and the tower famed in english history.
chapter 19 london was our present point of rest; we determined to remain several months in this wonderful and celebrated city.
clerval desired the intercourse of the men of genius and talent who flourished at this time, but this was with me a secondary object; i was principally occupied with the means of obtaining the information necessary for the completion of my promise and quickly availed myself of the letters of introduction that i had brought with me, addressed to the most distinguished natural philosophers.
if this journey had taken place during my days of study and happiness, it would have afforded me inexpressible pleasure.
but a blight had come over my existence, and i only visited these people for the sake of the information they might give me on the subject in which my interest was so terribly profound.
company was irksome to me; when alone, i could fill my mind with the sights of heaven and earth; the voice of henry soothed me, and i could thus cheat myself into a transitory peace.
but busy, uninteresting, joyous faces brought back despair to my heart.
i saw an insurmountable barrier placed between me and my fellow men; this barrier was sealed with the blood of william and justine, and to reflect on the events connected with those names filled my soul with anguish.
but in clerval i saw the image of my former self; he was inquisitive and anxious to gain experience and instruction.
the difference of manners which he observed was to him an inexhaustible source of instruction and amusement.
he was also pursuing an object he had long had in view.
his design was to visit india, in the belief that he had in his knowledge of its various languages, and in the views he had taken of its society, the means of materially assisting the progress of european colonization and trade.
in britain only could he further the execution of his plan.
he was for ever busy, and the only check to his enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind.
i tried to conceal this as much as possible, that i might not debar him from the pleasures natural to one who was entering on a new scene of life, undisturbed by any care or bitter recollection.
i often refused to accompany him, alleging another engagement, that i might remain alone.
i now also began to collect the materials necessary for my new creation, and this was to me like the torture of single drops of water continually falling on the head.
every thought that was devoted to it was an extreme anguish, and every word that i spoke in allusion to it caused my lips to quiver, and my heart to palpitate.
after passing some months in london, we received a letter from a person in scotland who had formerly been our visitor at geneva.
he mentioned the beauties of his native country and asked us if those were not sufficient allurements to induce us to prolong our journey as far north as perth, where he resided.
clerval eagerly desired to accept this invitation, and i, although i abhorred society, wished to view again mountains and streams and all the wondrous works with which nature adorns her chosen dwellingplaces.
we had arrived in england at the beginning of october, and it was now february.
we accordingly determined to commence our journey towards the north at the expiration of another month.
in this expedition we did not intend to follow the great road to edinburgh, but to visit windsor, oxford, matlock, and the cumberland lakes, resolving to arrive at the completion of this tour about the end of july.
i packed up my chemical instruments and the materials i had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some obscure nook in the northern highlands of scotland.
we quitted london on the 27th of march and remained a few days at windsor, rambling in its beautiful forest.
this was a new scene to us mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of game, and the herds of stately deer were all novelties to us.
from thence we proceeded to oxford.
as we entered this city, our minds were filled with the remembrance of the events that had been transacted there more than a century and a half before.
it was here that charles i. had collected his forces.
this city had remained faithful to him, after the whole nation had forsaken his cause to join the standard of parliament and liberty.
the memory of that unfortunate king and his companions, the amiable falkland, the insolent goring, his queen, and son, gave a peculiar interest to every part of the city which they might be supposed to have inhabited.
the spirit of elder days found a dwelling here, and we delighted to trace its footsteps.
if these feelings had not found an imaginary gratification, the appearance of the city had yet in itself sufficient beauty to obtain our admiration.
the colleges are ancient and picturesque; the streets are almost magnificent; and the lovely isis, which flows beside it through meadows of exquisite verdure, is spread forth into a placid expanse of waters, which reflects its majestic assemblage of towers, and spires, and domes, embosomed among aged trees.
i enjoyed this scene, and yet my enjoyment was embittered both by the memory of the past and the anticipation of the future.
i was formed for peaceful happiness.
during my youthful days discontent never visited my mind, and if i was ever overcome by ennui, the sight of what is beautiful in nature or the study of what is excellent and sublime in the productions of man could always interest my heart and communicate elasticity to my spirits.
but i am a blasted tree; the bolt has entered my soul; and i felt then that i should survive to exhibit what i shall soon cease to bea miserable spectacle of wrecked humanity, pitiable to others and intolerable to myself.
we passed a considerable period at oxford, rambling among its environs and endeavouring to identify every spot which might relate to the most animating epoch of english history.
our little voyages of discovery were often prolonged by the successive objects that presented themselves.
we visited the tomb of the illustrious hampden and the field on which that patriot fell.
for a moment my soul was elevated from its debasing and miserable fears to contemplate the divine ideas of liberty and selfsacrifice of which these sights were the monuments and the remembrancers.
for an instant i dared to shake off my chains and look around me with a free and lofty spirit, but the iron had eaten into my flesh, and i sank again, trembling and hopeless, into my miserable self.
we left oxford with regret and proceeded to matlock, which was our next place of rest.
the country in the neighbourhood of this village resembled, to a greater degree, the scenery of switzerland; but everything is on a lower scale, and the green hills want the crown of distant white alps which always attend on the piny mountains of my native country.
we visited the wondrous cave and the little cabinets of natural history, where the curiosities are disposed in the same manner as in the collections at servox and chamounix.
the latter name made me tremble when pronounced by henry, and i hastened to quit matlock, with which that terrible scene was thus associated.
from derby, still journeying northwards, we passed two months in cumberland and westmorland.
i could now almost fancy myself among the swiss mountains.
the little patches of snow which yet lingered on the northern sides of the mountains, the lakes, and the dashing of the rocky streams were all familiar and dear sights to me.
here also we made some acquaintances, who almost contrived to cheat me into happiness.
the delight of clerval was proportionably greater than mine; his mind expanded in the company of men of talent, and he found in his own nature greater capacities and resources than he could have imagined himself to have possessed while he associated with his inferiors.
i could pass my life here, said he to me; and among these mountains i should scarcely regret switzerland and the rhine.
but he found that a travellers life is one that includes much pain amidst its enjoyments.
his feelings are for ever on the stretch; and when he begins to sink into repose, he finds himself obliged to quit that on which he rests in pleasure for something new, which again engages his attention, and which also he forsakes for other novelties.
we had scarcely visited the various lakes of cumberland and westmorland and conceived an affection for some of the inhabitants when the period of our appointment with our scotch friend approached, and we left them to travel on.
for my own part i was not sorry.
i had now neglected my promise for some time, and i feared the effects of the dmons disappointment.
he might remain in switzerland and wreak his vengeance on my relatives.
this idea pursued me and tormented me at every moment from which i might otherwise have snatched repose and peace.
i waited for my letters with feverish impatience; if they were delayed i was miserable and overcome by a thousand fears; and when they arrived and i saw the superscription of elizabeth or my father, i hardly dared to read and ascertain my fate.
sometimes i thought that the fiend followed me and might expedite my remissness by murdering my companion.
when these thoughts possessed me, i would not quit henry for a moment, but followed him as his shadow, to protect him from the fancied rage of his destroyer.
i felt as if i had committed some great crime, the consciousness of which haunted me.
i was guiltless, but i had indeed drawn down a horrible curse upon my head, as mortal as that of crime.
i visited edinburgh with languid eyes and mind; and yet that city might have interested the most unfortunate being.
clerval did not like it so well as oxford, for the antiquity of the latter city was more pleasing to him.
but the beauty and regularity of the new town of edinburgh, its romantic castle and its environs, the most delightful in the world, arthurs seat, st. bernards well, and the pentland hills, compensated him for the change and filled him with cheerfulness and admiration.
but i was impatient to arrive at the termination of my journey.
we left edinburgh in a week, passing through coupar, st. andrews, and along the banks of the tay, to perth, where our friend expected us.
but i was in no mood to laugh and talk with strangers or enter into their feelings or plans with the good humour expected from a guest; and accordingly i told clerval that i wished to make the tour of scotland alone.
do you, said i, enjoy yourself, and let this be our rendezvous.
i may be absent a month or two; but do not interfere with my motions, i entreat you; leave me to peace and solitude for a short time; and when i return, i hope it will be with a lighter heart, more congenial to your own temper.
henry wished to dissuade me, but seeing me bent on this plan, ceased to remonstrate.
he entreated me to write often.
i had rather be with you, he said, in your solitary rambles, than with these scotch people, whom i do not know; hasten, then, my dear friend, to return, that i may again feel myself somewhat at home, which i cannot do in your absence.
having parted from my friend, i determined to visit some remote spot of scotland and finish my work in solitude.
i did not doubt but that the monster followed me and would discover himself to me when i should have finished, that he might receive his companion.
with this resolution i traversed the northern highlands and fixed on one of the remotest of the orkneys as the scene of my labours.
it was a place fitted for such a work, being hardly more than a rock whose high sides were continually beaten upon by the waves.
the soil was barren, scarcely affording pasture for a few miserable cows, and oatmeal for its inhabitants, which consisted of five persons, whose gaunt and scraggy limbs gave tokens of their miserable fare.
vegetables and bread, when they indulged in such luxuries, and even fresh water, was to be procured from the mainland, which was about five miles distant.
on the whole island there were but three miserable huts, and one of these was vacant when i arrived.
this i hired.
it contained but two rooms, and these exhibited all the squalidness of the most miserable penury.
the thatch had fallen in, the walls were unplastered, and the door was off its hinges.
i ordered it to be repaired, bought some furniture, and took possession, an incident which would doubtless have occasioned some surprise had not all the senses of the cottagers been benumbed by want and squalid poverty.
as it was, i lived ungazed at and unmolested, hardly thanked for the pittance of food and clothes which i gave, so much does suffering blunt even the coarsest sensations of men.
in this retreat i devoted the morning to labour; but in the evening, when the weather permitted, i walked on the stony beach of the sea to listen to the waves as they roared and dashed at my feet.
it was a monotonous yet everchanging scene.
i thought of switzerland; it was far different from this desolate and appalling landscape.
its hills are covered with vines, and its cottages are scattered thickly in the plains.
its fair lakes reflect a blue and gentle sky, and when troubled by the winds, their tumult is but as the play of a lively infant when compared to the roarings of the giant ocean.
in this manner i distributed my occupations when i first arrived, but as i proceeded in my labour, it became every day more horrible and irksome to me.
sometimes i could not prevail on myself to enter my laboratory for several days, and at other times i toiled day and night in order to complete my work.
it was, indeed, a filthy process in which i was engaged.
during my first experiment, a kind of enthusiastic frenzy had blinded me to the horror of my employment; my mind was intently fixed on the consummation of my labour, and my eyes were shut to the horror of my proceedings.
but now i went to it in cold blood, and my heart often sickened at the work of my hands.
thus situated, employed in the most detestable occupation, immersed in a solitude where nothing could for an instant call my attention from the actual scene in which i was engaged, my spirits became unequal; i grew restless and nervous.
every moment i feared to meet my persecutor.
sometimes i sat with my eyes fixed on the ground, fearing to raise them lest they should encounter the object which i so much dreaded to behold.
i feared to wander from the sight of my fellow creatures lest when alone he should come to claim his companion.
in the mean time i worked on, and my labour was already considerably advanced.
i looked towards its completion with a tremulous and eager hope, which i dared not trust myself to question but which was intermixed with obscure forebodings of evil that made my heart sicken in my bosom.
chapter 20 i sat one evening in my laboratory; the sun had set, and the moon was just rising from the sea; i had not sufficient light for my employment, and i remained idle, in a pause of consideration of whether i should leave my labour for the night or hasten its conclusion by an unremitting attention to it.
as i sat, a train of reflection occurred to me which led me to consider the effects of what i was now doing.
three years before, i was engaged in the same manner and had created a fiend whose unparalleled barbarity had desolated my heart and filled it for ever with the bitterest remorse.
i was now about to form another being of whose dispositions i was alike ignorant; she might become ten thousand times more malignant than her mate and delight, for its own sake, in murder and wretchedness.
he had sworn to quit the neighbourhood of man and hide himself in deserts, but she had not; and she, who in all probability was to become a thinking and reasoning animal, might refuse to comply with a compact made before her creation.
they might even hate each other; the creature who already lived loathed his own deformity, and might he not conceive a greater abhorrence for it when it came before his eyes in the female form?
she also might turn with disgust from him to the superior beauty of man; she might quit him, and he be again alone, exasperated by the fresh provocation of being deserted by one of his own species.
even if they were to leave europe and inhabit the deserts of the new world, yet one of the first results of those sympathies for which the dmon thirsted would be children, and a race of devils would be propagated upon the earth who might make the very existence of the species of man a condition precarious and full of terror.
had i right, for my own benefit, to inflict this curse upon everlasting generations?
i had before been moved by the sophisms of the being i had created; i had been struck senseless by his fiendish threats; but now, for the first time, the wickedness of my promise burst upon me; i shuddered to think that future ages might curse me as their pest, whose selfishness had not hesitated to buy its own peace at the price, perhaps, of the existence of the whole human race.
i trembled and my heart failed within me, when, on looking up, i saw by the light of the moon the dmon at the casement.
a ghastly grin wrinkled his lips as he gazed on me, where i sat fulfilling the task which he had allotted to me.
yes, he had followed me in my travels; he had loitered in forests, hid himself in caves, or taken refuge in wide and desert heaths; and he now came to mark my progress and claim the fulfilment of my promise.
as i looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of malice and treachery.
i thought with a sensation of madness on my promise of creating another like to him, and trembling with passion, tore to pieces the thing on which i was engaged.
the wretch saw me destroy the creature on whose future existence he depended for happiness, and with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew.
i left the room, and locking the door, made a solemn vow in my own heart never to resume my labours; and then, with trembling steps, i sought my own apartment.
i was alone; none were near me to dissipate the gloom and relieve me from the sickening oppression of the most terrible reveries.
several hours passed, and i remained near my window gazing on the sea; it was almost motionless, for the winds were hushed, and all nature reposed under the eye of the quiet moon.
a few fishing vessels alone specked the water, and now and then the gentle breeze wafted the sound of voices as the fishermen called to one another.
i felt the silence, although i was hardly conscious of its extreme profundity, until my ear was suddenly arrested by the paddling of oars near the shore, and a person landed close to my house.
in a few minutes after, i heard the creaking of my door, as if some one endeavoured to open it softly.
i trembled from head to foot; i felt a presentiment of who it was and wished to rouse one of the peasants who dwelt in a cottage not far from mine; but i was overcome by the sensation of helplessness, so often felt in frightful dreams, when you in vain endeavour to fly from an impending danger, and was rooted to the spot.
presently i heard the sound of footsteps along the passage; the door opened, and the wretch whom i dreaded appeared.
shutting the door, he approached me and said in a smothered voice, you have destroyed the work which you began; what is it that you intend?
do you dare to break your promise?
i have endured toil and misery; i left switzerland with you; i crept along the shores of the rhine, among its willow islands and over the summits of its hills.
i have dwelt many months in the heaths of england and among the deserts of scotland.
i have endured incalculable fatigue, and cold, and hunger; do you dare destroy my hopes?
begone!
i do break my promise; never will i create another like yourself, equal in deformity and wickedness.
slave, i before reasoned with you, but you have proved yourself unworthy of my condescension.
remember that i have power; you believe yourself miserable, but i can make you so wretched that the light of day will be hateful to you.
you are my creator, but i am your master; obey!
the hour of my irresolution is past, and the period of your power is arrived.
your threats cannot move me to do an act of wickedness; but they confirm me in a determination of not creating you a companion in vice.
shall i, in cool blood, set loose upon the earth a dmon whose delight is in death and wretchedness?
begone!
i am firm, and your words will only exasperate my rage.
the monster saw my determination in my face and gnashed his teeth in the impotence of anger.
shall each man, cried he, find a wife for his bosom, and each beast have his mate, and i be alone?
i had feelings of affection, and they were requited by detestation and scorn.
man!
you may hate, but beware!
your hours will pass in dread and misery, and soon the bolt will fall which must ravish from you your happiness for ever.
are you to be happy while i grovel in the intensity of my wretchedness?
you can blast my other passions, but revenge remainsrevenge, henceforth dearer than light or food!
i may die, but first you, my tyrant and tormentor, shall curse the sun that gazes on your misery.
beware, for i am fearless and therefore powerful.
i will watch with the wiliness of a snake, that i may sting with its venom.
man, you shall repent of the injuries you inflict.
devil, cease; and do not poison the air with these sounds of malice.
i have declared my resolution to you, and i am no coward to bend beneath words.
leave me; i am inexorable.
it is well.
i go; but remember, i shall be with you on your weddingnight.
i started forward and exclaimed, villain!
before you sign my deathwarrant, be sure that you are yourself safe.
i would have seized him, but he eluded me and quitted the house with precipitation.
in a few moments i saw him in his boat, which shot across the waters with an arrowy swiftness and was soon lost amidst the waves.
all was again silent, but his words rang in my ears.
i burned with rage to pursue the murderer of my peace and precipitate him into the ocean.
i walked up and down my room hastily and perturbed, while my imagination conjured up a thousand images to torment and sting me.
why had i not followed him and closed with him in mortal strife?
but i had suffered him to depart, and he had directed his course towards the mainland.
i shuddered to think who might be the next victim sacrificed to his insatiate revenge.
and then i thought again of his wordsi will be with you on your weddingnight.
that, then, was the period fixed for the fulfilment of my destiny.
in that hour i should die and at once satisfy and extinguish his malice.
the prospect did not move me to fear; yet when i thought of my beloved elizabeth, of her tears and endless sorrow, when she should find her lover so barbarously snatched from her, tears, the first i had shed for many months, streamed from my eyes, and i resolved not to fall before my enemy without a bitter struggle.
the night passed away, and the sun rose from the ocean; my feelings became calmer, if it may be called calmness when the violence of rage sinks into the depths of despair.
i left the house, the horrid scene of the last nights contention, and walked on the beach of the sea, which i almost regarded as an insuperable barrier between me and my fellow creatures; nay, a wish that such should prove the fact stole across me.
i desired that i might pass my life on that barren rock, wearily, it is true, but uninterrupted by any sudden shock of misery.
if i returned, it was to be sacrificed or to see those whom i most loved die under the grasp of a dmon whom i had myself created.
i walked about the isle like a restless spectre, separated from all it loved and miserable in the separation.
when it became noon, and the sun rose higher, i lay down on the grass and was overpowered by a deep sleep.
i had been awake the whole of the preceding night, my nerves were agitated, and my eyes inflamed by watching and misery.
the sleep into which i now sank refreshed me; and when i awoke, i again felt as if i belonged to a race of human beings like myself, and i began to reflect upon what had passed with greater composure; yet still the words of the fiend rang in my ears like a deathknell; they appeared like a dream, yet distinct and oppressive as a reality.
the sun had far descended, and i still sat on the shore, satisfying my appetite, which had become ravenous, with an oaten cake, when i saw a fishingboat land close to me, and one of the men brought me a packet; it contained letters from geneva, and one from clerval entreating me to join him.
he said that he was wearing away his time fruitlessly where he was, that letters from the friends he had formed in london desired his return to complete the negotiation they had entered into for his indian enterprise.
he could not any longer delay his departure; but as his journey to london might be followed, even sooner than he now conjectured, by his longer voyage, he entreated me to bestow as much of my society on him as i could spare.
he besought me, therefore, to leave my solitary isle and to meet him at perth, that we might proceed southwards together.
this letter in a degree recalled me to life, and i determined to quit my island at the expiration of two days.
yet, before i departed, there was a task to perform, on which i shuddered to reflect; i must pack up my chemical instruments, and for that purpose i must enter the room which had been the scene of my odious work, and i must handle those utensils the sight of which was sickening to me.
the next morning, at daybreak, i summoned sufficient courage and unlocked the door of my laboratory.
the remains of the halffinished creature, whom i had destroyed, lay scattered on the floor, and i almost felt as if i had mangled the living flesh of a human being.
i paused to collect myself and then entered the chamber.
with trembling hand i conveyed the instruments out of the room, but i reflected that i ought not to leave the relics of my work to excite the horror and suspicion of the peasants; and i accordingly put them into a basket, with a great quantity of stones, and laying them up, determined to throw them into the sea that very night; and in the meantime i sat upon the beach, employed in cleaning and arranging my chemical apparatus.
nothing could be more complete than the alteration that had taken place in my feelings since the night of the appearance of the dmon.
i had before regarded my promise with a gloomy despair as a thing that, with whatever consequences, must be fulfilled; but i now felt as if a film had been taken from before my eyes and that i for the first time saw clearly.
the idea of renewing my labours did not for one instant occur to me; the threat i had heard weighed on my thoughts, but i did not reflect that a voluntary act of mine could avert it.
i had resolved in my own mind that to create another like the fiend i had first made would be an act of the basest and most atrocious selfishness, and i banished from my mind every thought that could lead to a different conclusion.
between two and three in the morning the moon rose; and i then, putting my basket aboard a little skiff, sailed out about four miles from the shore.
the scene was perfectly solitary; a few boats were returning towards land, but i sailed away from them.
i felt as if i was about the commission of a dreadful crime and avoided with shuddering anxiety any encounter with my fellow creatures.
at one time the moon, which had before been clear, was suddenly overspread by a thick cloud, and i took advantage of the moment of darkness and cast my basket into the sea; i listened to the gurgling sound as it sank and then sailed away from the spot.
the sky became clouded, but the air was pure, although chilled by the northeast breeze that was then rising.
but it refreshed me and filled me with such agreeable sensations that i resolved to prolong my stay on the water, and fixing the rudder in a direct position, stretched myself at the bottom of the boat.
clouds hid the moon, everything was obscure, and i heard only the sound of the boat as its keel cut through the waves; the murmur lulled me, and in a short time i slept soundly.
i do not know how long i remained in this situation, but when i awoke i found that the sun had already mounted considerably.
the wind was high, and the waves continually threatened the safety of my little skiff.
i found that the wind was northeast and must have driven me far from the coast from which i had embarked.
i endeavoured to change my course but quickly found that if i again made the attempt the boat would be instantly filled with water.
thus situated, my only resource was to drive before the wind.
i confess that i felt a few sensations of terror.
i had no compass with me and was so slenderly acquainted with the geography of this part of the world that the sun was of little benefit to me.
i might be driven into the wide atlantic and feel all the tortures of starvation or be swallowed up in the immeasurable waters that roared and buffeted around me.
i had already been out many hours and felt the torment of a burning thirst, a prelude to my other sufferings.
i looked on the heavens, which were covered by clouds that flew before the wind, only to be replaced by others; i looked upon the sea; it was to be my grave.
fiend, i exclaimed, your task is already fulfilled!
i thought of elizabeth, of my father, and of clervalall left behind, on whom the monster might satisfy his sanguinary and merciless passions.
this idea plunged me into a reverie so despairing and frightful that even now, when the scene is on the point of closing before me for ever, i shudder to reflect on it.
some hours passed thus; but by degrees, as the sun declined towards the horizon, the wind died away into a gentle breeze and the sea became free from breakers.
but these gave place to a heavy swell; i felt sick and hardly able to hold the rudder, when suddenly i saw a line of high land towards the south.
almost spent, as i was, by fatigue and the dreadful suspense i endured for several hours, this sudden certainty of life rushed like a flood of warm joy to my heart, and tears gushed from my eyes.
how mutable are our feelings, and how strange is that clinging love we have of life even in the excess of misery!
i constructed another sail with a part of my dress and eagerly steered my course towards the land.
it had a wild and rocky appearance, but as i approached nearer i easily perceived the traces of cultivation.
i saw vessels near the shore and found myself suddenly transported back to the neighbourhood of civilised man.
i carefully traced the windings of the land and hailed a steeple which i at length saw issuing from behind a small promontory.
as i was in a state of extreme debility, i resolved to sail directly towards the town, as a place where i could most easily procure nourishment.
fortunately i had money with me.
as i turned the promontory i perceived a small neat town and a good harbour, which i entered, my heart bounding with joy at my unexpected escape.
as i was occupied in fixing the boat and arranging the sails, several people crowded towards the spot.
they seemed much surprised at my appearance, but instead of offering me any assistance, whispered together with gestures that at any other time might have produced in me a slight sensation of alarm.
as it was, i merely remarked that they spoke english, and i therefore addressed them in that language.
my good friends, said i, will you be so kind as to tell me the name of this town and inform me where i am?
you will know that soon enough, replied a man with a hoarse voice.
maybe you are come to a place that will not prove much to your taste, but you will not be consulted as to your quarters, i promise you.
i was exceedingly surprised on receiving so rude an answer from a stranger, and i was also disconcerted on perceiving the frowning and angry countenances of his companions.
why do you answer me so roughly?
i replied.
surely it is not the custom of englishmen to receive strangers so inhospitably.
i do not know, said the man, what the custom of the english may be, but it is the custom of the irish to hate villains.
while this strange dialogue continued, i perceived the crowd rapidly increase.
their faces expressed a mixture of curiosity and anger, which annoyed and in some degree alarmed me.
i inquired the way to the inn, but no one replied.
i then moved forward, and a murmuring sound arose from the crowd as they followed and surrounded me, when an illlooking man approaching tapped me on the shoulder and said, come, sir, you must follow me to mr. kirwins to give an account of yourself.
who is mr. kirwin?
why am i to give an account of myself?
is not this a free country?
ay, sir, free enough for honest folks.
mr. kirwin is a magistrate, and you are to give an account of the death of a gentleman who was found murdered here last night.
this answer startled me, but i presently recovered myself.
i was innocent; that could easily be proved; accordingly i followed my conductor in silence and was led to one of the best houses in the town.
i was ready to sink from fatigue and hunger, but being surrounded by a crowd, i thought it politic to rouse all my strength, that no physical debility might be construed into apprehension or conscious guilt.
little did i then expect the calamity that was in a few moments to overwhelm me and extinguish in horror and despair all fear of ignominy or death.
i must pause here, for it requires all my fortitude to recall the memory of the frightful events which i am about to relate, in proper detail, to my recollection.
chapter 21 i was soon introduced into the presence of the magistrate, an old benevolent man with calm and mild manners.
he looked upon me, however, with some degree of severity, and then, turning towards my conductors, he asked who appeared as witnesses on this occasion.
about half a dozen men came forward; and, one being selected by the magistrate, he deposed that he had been out fishing the night before with his son and brotherinlaw, daniel nugent, when, about ten oclock, they observed a strong northerly blast rising, and they accordingly put in for port.
it was a very dark night, as the moon had not yet risen; they did not land at the harbour, but, as they had been accustomed, at a creek about two miles below.
he walked on first, carrying a part of the fishing tackle, and his companions followed him at some distance.
as he was proceeding along the sands, he struck his foot against something and fell at his length on the ground.
his companions came up to assist him, and by the light of their lantern they found that he had fallen on the body of a man, who was to all appearance dead.
their first supposition was that it was the corpse of some person who had been drowned and was thrown on shore by the waves, but on examination they found that the clothes were not wet and even that the body was not then cold.
they instantly carried it to the cottage of an old woman near the spot and endeavoured, but in vain, to restore it to life.
it appeared to be a handsome young man, about five and twenty years of age.
he had apparently been strangled, for there was no sign of any violence except the black mark of fingers on his neck.
the first part of this deposition did not in the least interest me, but when the mark of the fingers was mentioned i remembered the murder of my brother and felt myself extremely agitated; my limbs trembled, and a mist came over my eyes, which obliged me to lean on a chair for support.
the magistrate observed me with a keen eye and of course drew an unfavourable augury from my manner.
the son confirmed his fathers account, but when daniel nugent was called he swore positively that just before the fall of his companion, he saw a boat, with a single man in it, at a short distance from the shore; and as far as he could judge by the light of a few stars, it was the same boat in which i had just landed.
a woman deposed that she lived near the beach and was standing at the door of her cottage, waiting for the return of the fishermen, about an hour before she heard of the discovery of the body, when she saw a boat with only one man in it push off from that part of the shore where the corpse was afterwards found.
another woman confirmed the account of the fishermen having brought the body into her house; it was not cold.
they put it into a bed and rubbed it, and daniel went to the town for an apothecary, but life was quite gone.
several other men were examined concerning my landing, and they agreed that, with the strong north wind that had arisen during the night, it was very probable that i had beaten about for many hours and had been obliged to return nearly to the same spot from which i had departed.
besides, they observed that it appeared that i had brought the body from another place, and it was likely that as i did not appear to know the shore, i might have put into the harbour ignorant of the distance of the town of  from the place where i had deposited the corpse.
mr. kirwin, on hearing this evidence, desired that i should be taken into the room where the body lay for interment, that it might be observed what effect the sight of it would produce upon me.
this idea was probably suggested by the extreme agitation i had exhibited when the mode of the murder had been described.
i was accordingly conducted, by the magistrate and several other persons, to the inn.
i could not help being struck by the strange coincidences that had taken place during this eventful night; but, knowing that i had been conversing with several persons in the island i had inhabited about the time that the body had been found, i was perfectly tranquil as to the consequences of the affair.
i entered the room where the corpse lay and was led up to the coffin.
how can i describe my sensations on beholding it?
i feel yet parched with horror, nor can i reflect on that terrible moment without shuddering and agony.
the examination, the presence of the magistrate and witnesses, passed like a dream from my memory when i saw the lifeless form of henry clerval stretched before me.
i gasped for breath, and throwing myself on the body, i exclaimed, have my murderous machinations deprived you also, my dearest henry, of life?
two i have already destroyed; other victims await their destiny; but you, clerval, my friend, my benefactor the human frame could no longer support the agonies that i endured, and i was carried out of the room in strong convulsions.
a fever succeeded to this.
i lay for two months on the point of death; my ravings, as i afterwards heard, were frightful; i called myself the murderer of william, of justine, and of clerval.
sometimes i entreated my attendants to assist me in the destruction of the fiend by whom i was tormented; and at others i felt the fingers of the monster already grasping my neck, and screamed aloud with agony and terror.
fortunately, as i spoke my native language, mr. kirwin alone understood me; but my gestures and bitter cries were sufficient to affright the other witnesses.
why did i not die?
more miserable than man ever was before, why did i not sink into forgetfulness and rest?
death snatches away many blooming children, the only hopes of their doting parents; how many brides and youthful lovers have been one day in the bloom of health and hope, and the next a prey for worms and the decay of the tomb!
of what materials was i made that i could thus resist so many shocks, which, like the turning of the wheel, continually renewed the torture?
but i was doomed to live and in two months found myself as awaking from a dream, in a prison, stretched on a wretched bed, surrounded by gaolers, turnkeys, bolts, and all the miserable apparatus of a dungeon.
it was morning, i remember, when i thus awoke to understanding; i had forgotten the particulars of what had happened and only felt as if some great misfortune had suddenly overwhelmed me; but when i looked around and saw the barred windows and the squalidness of the room in which i was, all flashed across my memory and i groaned bitterly.
this sound disturbed an old woman who was sleeping in a chair beside me.
she was a hired nurse, the wife of one of the turnkeys, and her countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterise that class.
the lines of her face were hard and rude, like that of persons accustomed to see without sympathising in sights of misery.
her tone expressed her entire indifference; she addressed me in english, and the voice struck me as one that i had heard during my sufferings.
are you better now, sir?
said she.
i replied in the same language, with a feeble voice, i believe i am; but if it be all true, if indeed i did not dream, i am sorry that i am still alive to feel this misery and horror.
for that matter, replied the old woman, if you mean about the gentleman you murdered, i believe that it were better for you if you were dead, for i fancy it will go hard with you!
however, thats none of my business; i am sent to nurse you and get you well; i do my duty with a safe conscience; it were well if everybody did the same.
i turned with loathing from the woman who could utter so unfeeling a speech to a person just saved, on the very edge of death; but i felt languid and unable to reflect on all that had passed.
the whole series of my life appeared to me as a dream; i sometimes doubted if indeed it were all true, for it never presented itself to my mind with the force of reality.
as the images that floated before me became more distinct, i grew feverish; a darkness pressed around me; no one was near me who soothed me with the gentle voice of love; no dear hand supported me.
the physician came and prescribed medicines, and the old woman prepared them for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and the expression of brutality was strongly marked in the visage of the second.
who could be interested in the fate of a murderer but the hangman who would gain his fee?
these were my first reflections, but i soon learned that mr. kirwin had shown me extreme kindness.
he had caused the best room in the prison to be prepared for me (wretched indeed was the best); and it was he who had provided a physician and a nurse.
it is true, he seldom came to see me, for although he ardently desired to relieve the sufferings of every human creature, he did not wish to be present at the agonies and miserable ravings of a murderer.
he came, therefore, sometimes to see that i was not neglected, but his visits were short and with long intervals.
one day, while i was gradually recovering, i was seated in a chair, my eyes half open and my cheeks livid like those in death.
i was overcome by gloom and misery and often reflected i had better seek death than desire to remain in a world which to me was replete with wretchedness.
at one time i considered whether i should not declare myself guilty and suffer the penalty of the law, less innocent than poor justine had been.
such were my thoughts when the door of my apartment was opened and mr. kirwin entered.
his countenance expressed sympathy and compassion; he drew a chair close to mine and addressed me in french, i fear that this place is very shocking to you; can i do anything to make you more comfortable?
i thank you, but all that you mention is nothing to me; on the whole earth there is no comfort which i am capable of receiving.
i know that the sympathy of a stranger can be but of little relief to one borne down as you are by so strange a misfortune.
but you will, i hope, soon quit this melancholy abode, for doubtless evidence can easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge.
that is my least concern; i am, by a course of strange events, become the most miserable of mortals.
persecuted and tortured as i am and have been, can death be any evil to me?
nothing indeed could be more unfortunate and agonising than the strange chances that have lately occurred.
you were thrown, by some surprising accident, on this shore, renowned for its hospitality, seized immediately, and charged with murder.
the first sight that was presented to your eyes was the body of your friend, murdered in so unaccountable a manner and placed, as it were, by some fiend across your path.
as mr. kirwin said this, notwithstanding the agitation i endured on this retrospect of my sufferings, i also felt considerable surprise at the knowledge he seemed to possess concerning me.
i suppose some astonishment was exhibited in my countenance, for mr. kirwin hastened to say, immediately upon your being taken ill, all the papers that were on your person were brought me, and i examined them that i might discover some trace by which i could send to your relations an account of your misfortune and illness.
i found several letters, and, among others, one which i discovered from its commencement to be from your father.
i instantly wrote to geneva; nearly two months have elapsed since the departure of my letter.
but you are ill; even now you tremble; you are unfit for agitation of any kind.
this suspense is a thousand times worse than the most horrible event; tell me what new scene of death has been acted, and whose murder i am now to lament?
your family is perfectly well, said mr. kirwin with gentleness; and someone, a friend, is come to visit you.
i know not by what chain of thought the idea presented itself, but it instantly darted into my mind that the murderer had come to mock at my misery and taunt me with the death of clerval, as a new incitement for me to comply with his hellish desires.
i put my hand before my eyes, and cried out in agony, oh!
take him away!
i cannot see him; for gods sake, do not let him enter!
mr. kirwin regarded me with a troubled countenance.
he could not help regarding my exclamation as a presumption of my guilt and said in rather a severe tone, i should have thought, young man, that the presence of your father would have been welcome instead of inspiring such violent repugnance.
my father!
cried i, while every feature and every muscle was relaxed from anguish to pleasure.
is my father indeed come?
how kind, how very kind!
but where is he, why does he not hasten to me?
my change of manner surprised and pleased the magistrate; perhaps he thought that my former exclamation was a momentary return of delirium, and now he instantly resumed his former benevolence.
he rose and quitted the room with my nurse, and in a moment my father entered it.
nothing, at this moment, could have given me greater pleasure than the arrival of my father.
i stretched out my hand to him and cried, are you then safeand elizabethand ernest?
my father calmed me with assurances of their welfare and endeavoured, by dwelling on these subjects so interesting to my heart, to raise my desponding spirits; but he soon felt that a prison cannot be the abode of cheerfulness.
what a place is this that you inhabit, my son!
said he, looking mournfully at the barred windows and wretched appearance of the room.
you travelled to seek happiness, but a fatality seems to pursue you.
and poor clerval the name of my unfortunate and murdered friend was an agitation too great to be endured in my weak state; i shed tears.
alas!
yes, my father, replied i; some destiny of the most horrible kind hangs over me, and i must live to fulfil it, or surely i should have died on the coffin of henry.
we were not allowed to converse for any length of time, for the precarious state of my health rendered every precaution necessary that could ensure tranquillity.
mr. kirwin came in and insisted that my strength should not be exhausted by too much exertion.
but the appearance of my father was to me like that of my good angel, and i gradually recovered my health.
as my sickness quitted me, i was absorbed by a gloomy and black melancholy that nothing could dissipate.
the image of clerval was for ever before me, ghastly and murdered.
more than once the agitation into which these reflections threw me made my friends dread a dangerous relapse.
alas!
why did they preserve so miserable and detested a life?
it was surely that i might fulfil my destiny, which is now drawing to a close.
soon, oh, very soon, will death extinguish these throbbings and relieve me from the mighty weight of anguish that bears me to the dust; and, in executing the award of justice, i shall also sink to rest.
then the appearance of death was distant, although the wish was ever present to my thoughts; and i often sat for hours motionless and speechless, wishing for some mighty revolution that might bury me and my destroyer in its ruins.
the season of the assizes approached.
i had already been three months in prison, and although i was still weak and in continual danger of a relapse, i was obliged to travel nearly a hundred miles to the country town where the court was held.
mr. kirwin charged himself with every care of collecting witnesses and arranging my defence.
i was spared the disgrace of appearing publicly as a criminal, as the case was not brought before the court that decides on life and death.
the grand jury rejected the bill, on its being proved that i was on the orkney islands at the hour the body of my friend was found; and a fortnight after my removal i was liberated from prison.
my father was enraptured on finding me freed from the vexations of a criminal charge, that i was again allowed to breathe the fresh atmosphere and permitted to return to my native country.
i did not participate in these feelings, for to me the walls of a dungeon or a palace were alike hateful.
the cup of life was poisoned for ever, and although the sun shone upon me, as upon the happy and gay of heart, i saw around me nothing but a dense and frightful darkness, penetrated by no light but the glimmer of two eyes that glared upon me.
sometimes they were the expressive eyes of henry, languishing in death, the dark orbs nearly covered by the lids and the long black lashes that fringed them; sometimes it was the watery, clouded eyes of the monster, as i first saw them in my chamber at ingolstadt.
my father tried to awaken in me the feelings of affection.
he talked of geneva, which i should soon visit, of elizabeth and ernest; but these words only drew deep groans from me.
sometimes, indeed, i felt a wish for happiness and thought with melancholy delight of my beloved cousin or longed, with a devouring maladie du pays, to see once more the blue lake and rapid rhone, that had been so dear to me in early childhood; but my general state of feeling was a torpor in which a prison was as welcome a residence as the divinest scene in nature; and these fits were seldom interrupted but by paroxysms of anguish and despair.
at these moments i often endeavoured to put an end to the existence i loathed, and it required unceasing attendance and vigilance to restrain me from committing some dreadful act of violence.
yet one duty remained to me, the recollection of which finally triumphed over my selfish despair.
it was necessary that i should return without delay to geneva, there to watch over the lives of those i so fondly loved and to lie in wait for the murderer, that if any chance led me to the place of his concealment, or if he dared again to blast me by his presence, i might, with unfailing aim, put an end to the existence of the monstrous image which i had endued with the mockery of a soul still more monstrous.
my father still desired to delay our departure, fearful that i could not sustain the fatigues of a journey, for i was a shattered wreckthe shadow of a human being.
my strength was gone.
i was a mere skeleton, and fever night and day preyed upon my wasted frame.
still, as i urged our leaving ireland with such inquietude and impatience, my father thought it best to yield.
we took our passage on board a vessel bound for havredegrace and sailed with a fair wind from the irish shores.
it was midnight.
i lay on the deck looking at the stars and listening to the dashing of the waves.
i hailed the darkness that shut ireland from my sight, and my pulse beat with a feverish joy when i reflected that i should soon see geneva.
the past appeared to me in the light of a frightful dream; yet the vessel in which i was, the wind that blew me from the detested shore of ireland, and the sea which surrounded me, told me too forcibly that i was deceived by no vision and that clerval, my friend and dearest companion, had fallen a victim to me and the monster of my creation.
i repassed, in my memory, my whole life; my quiet happiness while residing with my family in geneva, the death of my mother, and my departure for ingolstadt.
i remembered, shuddering, the mad enthusiasm that hurried me on to the creation of my hideous enemy, and i called to mind the night in which he first lived.
i was unable to pursue the train of thought; a thousand feelings pressed upon me, and i wept bitterly.
ever since my recovery from the fever, i had been in the custom of taking every night a small quantity of laudanum, for it was by means of this drug only that i was enabled to gain the rest necessary for the preservation of life.
oppressed by the recollection of my various misfortunes, i now swallowed double my usual quantity and soon slept profoundly.
but sleep did not afford me respite from thought and misery; my dreams presented a thousand objects that scared me.
towards morning i was possessed by a kind of nightmare; i felt the fiends grasp in my neck and could not free myself from it; groans and cries rang in my ears.
my father, who was watching over me, perceiving my restlessness, awoke me; the dashing waves were around, the cloudy sky above, the fiend was not here: a sense of security, a feeling that a truce was established between the present hour and the irresistible, disastrous future imparted to me a kind of calm forgetfulness, of which the human mind is by its structure peculiarly susceptible.
chapter 22 the voyage came to an end.
we landed, and proceeded to paris.
i soon found that i had overtaxed my strength and that i must repose before i could continue my journey.
my fathers care and attentions were indefatigable, but he did not know the origin of my sufferings and sought erroneous methods to remedy the incurable ill. he wished me to seek amusement in society.
i abhorred the face of man.
oh, not abhorred!
they were my brethren, my fellow beings, and i felt attracted even to the most repulsive among them, as to creatures of an angelic nature and celestial mechanism.
but i felt that i had no right to share their intercourse.
i had unchained an enemy among them whose joy it was to shed their blood and to revel in their groans.
how they would, each and all, abhor me and hunt me from the world, did they know my unhallowed acts and the crimes which had their source in me!
my father yielded at length to my desire to avoid society and strove by various arguments to banish my despair.
sometimes he thought that i felt deeply the degradation of being obliged to answer a charge of murder, and he endeavoured to prove to me the futility of pride.
alas!
my father, said i, how little do you know me.
human beings, their feelings and passions, would indeed be degraded if such a wretch as i felt pride.
justine, poor unhappy justine, was as innocent as i, and she suffered the same charge; she died for it; and i am the cause of thisi murdered her.
william, justine, and henrythey all died by my hands.
my father had often, during my imprisonment, heard me make the same assertion; when i thus accused myself, he sometimes seemed to desire an explanation, and at others he appeared to consider it as the offspring of delirium, and that, during my illness, some idea of this kind had presented itself to my imagination, the remembrance of which i preserved in my convalescence.
i avoided explanation and maintained a continual silence concerning the wretch i had created.
i had a persuasion that i should be supposed mad, and this in itself would for ever have chained my tongue.
but, besides, i could not bring myself to disclose a secret which would fill my hearer with consternation and make fear and unnatural horror the inmates of his breast.
i checked, therefore, my impatient thirst for sympathy and was silent when i would have given the world to have confided the fatal secret.
yet, still, words like those i have recorded would burst uncontrollably from me.
i could offer no explanation of them, but their truth in part relieved the burden of my mysterious woe.
upon this occasion my father said, with an expression of unbounded wonder, my dearest victor, what infatuation is this?
my dear son, i entreat you never to make such an assertion again.
i am not mad, i cried energetically; the sun and the heavens, who have viewed my operations, can bear witness of my truth.
i am the assassin of those most innocent victims; they died by my machinations.
a thousand times would i have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have saved their lives; but i could not, my father, indeed i could not sacrifice the whole human race.
the conclusion of this speech convinced my father that my ideas were deranged, and he instantly changed the subject of our conversation and endeavoured to alter the course of my thoughts.
he wished as much as possible to obliterate the memory of the scenes that had taken place in ireland and never alluded to them or suffered me to speak of my misfortunes.
as time passed away i became more calm; misery had her dwelling in my heart, but i no longer talked in the same incoherent manner of my own crimes; sufficient for me was the consciousness of them.
by the utmost selfviolence i curbed the imperious voice of wretchedness, which sometimes desired to declare itself to the whole world, and my manners were calmer and more composed than they had ever been since my journey to the sea of ice.
a few days before we left paris on our way to switzerland, i received the following letter from elizabeth: my dear friend, it gave me the greatest pleasure to receive a letter from my uncle dated at paris; you are no longer at a formidable distance, and i may hope to see you in less than a fortnight.
my poor cousin, how much you must have suffered!
i expect to see you looking even more ill than when you quitted geneva.
this winter has been passed most miserably, tortured as i have been by anxious suspense; yet i hope to see peace in your countenance and to find that your heart is not totally void of comfort and tranquillity.
yet i fear that the same feelings now exist that made you so miserable a year ago, even perhaps augmented by time.
i would not disturb you at this period, when so many misfortunes weigh upon you, but a conversation that i had with my uncle previous to his departure renders some explanation necessary before we meet.
explanation!
you may possibly say, what can elizabeth have to explain?
if you really say this, my questions are answered and all my doubts satisfied.
but you are distant from me, and it is possible that you may dread and yet be pleased with this explanation; and in a probability of this being the case, i dare not any longer postpone writing what, during your absence, i have often wished to express to you but have never had the courage to begin.
you well know, victor, that our union had been the favourite plan of your parents ever since our infancy.
we were told this when young, and taught to look forward to it as an event that would certainly take place.
we were affectionate playfellows during childhood, and, i believe, dear and valued friends to one another as we grew older.
but as brother and sister often entertain a lively affection towards each other without desiring a more intimate union, may not such also be our case?
tell me, dearest victor.
answer me, i conjure you by our mutual happiness, with simple truthdo you not love another?
you have travelled; you have spent several years of your life at ingolstadt; and i confess to you, my friend, that when i saw you last autumn so unhappy, flying to solitude from the society of every creature, i could not help supposing that you might regret our connection and believe yourself bound in honour to fulfil the wishes of your parents, although they opposed themselves to your inclinations.
but this is false reasoning.
i confess to you, my friend, that i love you and that in my airy dreams of futurity you have been my constant friend and companion.
but it is your happiness i desire as well as my own when i declare to you that our marriage would render me eternally miserable unless it were the dictate of your own free choice.
even now i weep to think that, borne down as you are by the cruellest misfortunes, you may stifle, by the word honour, all hope of that love and happiness which would alone restore you to yourself.
i, who have so disinterested an affection for you, may increase your miseries tenfold by being an obstacle to your wishes.
ah!
victor, be assured that your cousin and playmate has too sincere a love for you not to be made miserable by this supposition.
be happy, my friend; and if you obey me in this one request, remain satisfied that nothing on earth will have the power to interrupt my tranquillity.
do not let this letter disturb you; do not answer tomorrow, or the next day, or even until you come, if it will give you pain.
my uncle will send me news of your health, and if i see but one smile on your lips when we meet, occasioned by this or any other exertion of mine, i shall need no other happiness.
elizabeth lavenza.
geneva, may 18th, 17 this letter revived in my memory what i had before forgotten, the threat of the fiendi will be with you on your weddingnight!
such was my sentence, and on that night would the dmon employ every art to destroy me and tear me from the glimpse of happiness which promised partly to console my sufferings.
on that night he had determined to consummate his crimes by my death.
well, be it so; a deadly struggle would then assuredly take place, in which if he were victorious i should be at peace and his power over me be at an end.
if he were vanquished, i should be a free man.
alas!
what freedom?
such as the peasant enjoys when his family have been massacred before his eyes, his cottage burnt, his lands laid waste, and he is turned adrift, homeless, penniless, and alone, but free.
such would be my liberty except that in my elizabeth i possessed a treasure, alas, balanced by those horrors of remorse and guilt which would pursue me until death.
sweet and beloved elizabeth!
i read and reread her letter, and some softened feelings stole into my heart and dared to whisper paradisiacal dreams of love and joy; but the apple was already eaten, and the angels arm bared to drive me from all hope.
yet i would die to make her happy.
if the monster executed his threat, death was inevitable; yet, again, i considered whether my marriage would hasten my fate.
my destruction might indeed arrive a few months sooner, but if my torturer should suspect that i postponed it, influenced by his menaces, he would surely find other and perhaps more dreadful means of revenge.
he had vowed to be with me on my weddingnight, yet he did not consider that threat as binding him to peace in the meantime, for as if to show me that he was not yet satiated with blood, he had murdered clerval immediately after the enunciation of his threats.
i resolved, therefore, that if my immediate union with my cousin would conduce either to hers or my fathers happiness, my adversarys designs against my life should not retard it a single hour.
in this state of mind i wrote to elizabeth.
my letter was calm and affectionate.
i fear, my beloved girl, i said, little happiness remains for us on earth; yet all that i may one day enjoy is centred in you.
chase away your idle fears; to you alone do i consecrate my life and my endeavours for contentment.
i have one secret, elizabeth, a dreadful one; when revealed to you, it will chill your frame with horror, and then, far from being surprised at my misery, you will only wonder that i survive what i have endured.
i will confide this tale of misery and terror to you the day after our marriage shall take place, for, my sweet cousin, there must be perfect confidence between us.
but until then, i conjure you, do not mention or allude to it.
this i most earnestly entreat, and i know you will comply.
in about a week after the arrival of elizabeths letter we returned to geneva.
the sweet girl welcomed me with warm affection, yet tears were in her eyes as she beheld my emaciated frame and feverish cheeks.
i saw a change in her also.
she was thinner and had lost much of that heavenly vivacity that had before charmed me; but her gentleness and soft looks of compassion made her a more fit companion for one blasted and miserable as i was.
the tranquillity which i now enjoyed did not endure.
memory brought madness with it, and when i thought of what had passed, a real insanity possessed me; sometimes i was furious and burnt with rage, sometimes low and despondent.
i neither spoke nor looked at anyone, but sat motionless, bewildered by the multitude of miseries that overcame me.
elizabeth alone had the power to draw me from these fits; her gentle voice would soothe me when transported by passion and inspire me with human feelings when sunk in torpor.
she wept with me and for me.
when reason returned, she would remonstrate and endeavour to inspire me with resignation.
ah!
it is well for the unfortunate to be resigned, but for the guilty there is no peace.
the agonies of remorse poison the luxury there is otherwise sometimes found in indulging the excess of grief.
soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate marriage with elizabeth.
i remained silent.
have you, then, some other attachment?
none on earth.
i love elizabeth and look forward to our union with delight.
let the day therefore be fixed; and on it i will consecrate myself, in life or death, to the happiness of my cousin.
my dear victor, do not speak thus.
heavy misfortunes have befallen us, but let us only cling closer to what remains and transfer our love for those whom we have lost to those who yet live.
our circle will be small but bound close by the ties of affection and mutual misfortune.
and when time shall have softened your despair, new and dear objects of care will be born to replace those of whom we have been so cruelly deprived.
such were the lessons of my father.
but to me the remembrance of the threat returned; nor can you wonder that, omnipotent as the fiend had yet been in his deeds of blood, i should almost regard him as invincible, and that when he had pronounced the words i shall be with you on your weddingnight, i should regard the threatened fate as unavoidable.
but death was no evil to me if the loss of elizabeth were balanced with it, and i therefore, with a contented and even cheerful countenance, agreed with my father that if my cousin would consent, the ceremony should take place in ten days, and thus put, as i imagined, the seal to my fate.
great god!
if for one instant i had thought what might be the hellish intention of my fiendish adversary, i would rather have banished myself for ever from my native country and wandered a friendless outcast over the earth than have consented to this miserable marriage.
but, as if possessed of magic powers, the monster had blinded me to his real intentions; and when i thought that i had prepared only my own death, i hastened that of a far dearer victim.
as the period fixed for our marriage drew nearer, whether from cowardice or a prophetic feeling, i felt my heart sink within me.
but i concealed my feelings by an appearance of hilarity that brought smiles and joy to the countenance of my father, but hardly deceived the everwatchful and nicer eye of elizabeth.
she looked forward to our union with placid contentment, not unmingled with a little fear, which past misfortunes had impressed, that what now appeared certain and tangible happiness might soon dissipate into an airy dream and leave no trace but deep and everlasting regret.
preparations were made for the event, congratulatory visits were received, and all wore a smiling appearance.
i shut up, as well as i could, in my own heart the anxiety that preyed there and entered with seeming earnestness into the plans of my father, although they might only serve as the decorations of my tragedy.
through my fathers exertions a part of the inheritance of elizabeth had been restored to her by the austrian government.
a small possession on the shores of como belonged to her.
it was agreed that, immediately after our union, we should proceed to villa lavenza and spend our first days of happiness beside the beautiful lake near which it stood.
in the meantime i took every precaution to defend my person in case the fiend should openly attack me.
i carried pistols and a dagger constantly about me and was ever on the watch to prevent artifice, and by these means gained a greater degree of tranquillity.
indeed, as the period approached, the threat appeared more as a delusion, not to be regarded as worthy to disturb my peace, while the happiness i hoped for in my marriage wore a greater appearance of certainty as the day fixed for its solemnisation drew nearer and i heard it continually spoken of as an occurrence which no accident could possibly prevent.
elizabeth seemed happy; my tranquil demeanour contributed greatly to calm her mind.
but on the day that was to fulfil my wishes and my destiny, she was melancholy, and a presentiment of evil pervaded her; and perhaps also she thought of the dreadful secret which i had promised to reveal to her on the following day.
my father was in the meantime overjoyed, and, in the bustle of preparation, only recognised in the melancholy of his niece the diffidence of a bride.
after the ceremony was performed a large party assembled at my fathers, but it was agreed that elizabeth and i should commence our journey by water, sleeping that night at evian and continuing our voyage on the following day.
the day was fair, the wind favourable; all smiled on our nuptial embarkation.
those were the last moments of my life during which i enjoyed the feeling of happiness.
we passed rapidly along; the sun was hot, but we were sheltered from its rays by a kind of canopy while we enjoyed the beauty of the scene, sometimes on one side of the lake, where we saw mont salve, the pleasant banks of montalgre, and at a distance, surmounting all, the beautiful mont blanc, and the assemblage of snowy mountains that in vain endeavour to emulate her; sometimes coasting the opposite banks, we saw the mighty jura opposing its dark side to the ambition that would quit its native country, and an almost insurmountable barrier to the invader who should wish to enslave it.
i took the hand of elizabeth.
you are sorrowful, my love.
ah!
if you knew what i have suffered and what i may yet endure, you would endeavour to let me taste the quiet and freedom from despair that this one day at least permits me to enjoy.
be happy, my dear victor, replied elizabeth; there is, i hope, nothing to distress you; and be assured that if a lively joy is not painted in my face, my heart is contented.
something whispers to me not to depend too much on the prospect that is opened before us, but i will not listen to such a sinister voice.
observe how fast we move along and how the clouds, which sometimes obscure and sometimes rise above the dome of mont blanc, render this scene of beauty still more interesting.
look also at the innumerable fish that are swimming in the clear waters, where we can distinguish every pebble that lies at the bottom.
what a divine day!
how happy and serene all nature appears!
thus elizabeth endeavoured to divert her thoughts and mine from all reflection upon melancholy subjects.
but her temper was fluctuating; joy for a few instants shone in her eyes, but it continually gave place to distraction and reverie.
the sun sank lower in the heavens; we passed the river drance and observed its path through the chasms of the higher and the glens of the lower hills.
the alps here come closer to the lake, and we approached the amphitheatre of mountains which forms its eastern boundary.
the spire of evian shone under the woods that surrounded it and the range of mountain above mountain by which it was overhung.
the wind, which had hitherto carried us along with amazing rapidity, sank at sunset to a light breeze; the soft air just ruffled the water and caused a pleasant motion among the trees as we approached the shore, from which it wafted the most delightful scent of flowers and hay.
the sun sank beneath the horizon as we landed, and as i touched the shore i felt those cares and fears revive which soon were to clasp me and cling to me for ever.
chapter 23 it was eight oclock when we landed; we walked for a short time on the shore, enjoying the transitory light, and then retired to the inn and contemplated the lovely scene of waters, woods, and mountains, obscured in darkness, yet still displaying their black outlines.
the wind, which had fallen in the south, now rose with great violence in the west.
the moon had reached her summit in the heavens and was beginning to descend; the clouds swept across it swifter than the flight of the vulture and dimmed her rays, while the lake reflected the scene of the busy heavens, rendered still busier by the restless waves that were beginning to rise.
suddenly a heavy storm of rain descended.
i had been calm during the day, but so soon as night obscured the shapes of objects, a thousand fears arose in my mind.
i was anxious and watchful, while my right hand grasped a pistol which was hidden in my bosom; every sound terrified me, but i resolved that i would sell my life dearly and not shrink from the conflict until my own life or that of my adversary was extinguished.
elizabeth observed my agitation for some time in timid and fearful silence, but there was something in my glance which communicated terror to her, and trembling, she asked, what is it that agitates you, my dear victor?
what is it you fear?
oh!
peace, peace, my love, replied i; this night, and all will be safe; but this night is dreadful, very dreadful.
i passed an hour in this state of mind, when suddenly i reflected how fearful the combat which i momentarily expected would be to my wife, and i earnestly entreated her to retire, resolving not to join her until i had obtained some knowledge as to the situation of my enemy.
she left me, and i continued some time walking up and down the passages of the house and inspecting every corner that might afford a retreat to my adversary.
but i discovered no trace of him and was beginning to conjecture that some fortunate chance had intervened to prevent the execution of his menaces when suddenly i heard a shrill and dreadful scream.
it came from the room into which elizabeth had retired.
as i heard it, the whole truth rushed into my mind, my arms dropped, the motion of every muscle and fibre was suspended; i could feel the blood trickling in my veins and tingling in the extremities of my limbs.
this state lasted but for an instant; the scream was repeated, and i rushed into the room.
great god!
why did i not then expire!
why am i here to relate the destruction of the best hope and the purest creature on earth?
she was there, lifeless and inanimate, thrown across the bed, her head hanging down and her pale and distorted features half covered by her hair.
everywhere i turn i see the same figureher bloodless arms and relaxed form flung by the murderer on its bridal bier.
could i behold this and live?
alas!
life is obstinate and clings closest where it is most hated.
for a moment only did i lose recollection; i fell senseless on the ground.
when i recovered i found myself surrounded by the people of the inn; their countenances expressed a breathless terror, but the horror of others appeared only as a mockery, a shadow of the feelings that oppressed me.
i escaped from them to the room where lay the body of elizabeth, my love, my wife, so lately living, so dear, so worthy.
she had been moved from the posture in which i had first beheld her, and now, as she lay, her head upon her arm and a handkerchief thrown across her face and neck, i might have supposed her asleep.
i rushed towards her and embraced her with ardour, but the deadly languor and coldness of the limbs told me that what i now held in my arms had ceased to be the elizabeth whom i had loved and cherished.
the murderous mark of the fiends grasp was on her neck, and the breath had ceased to issue from her lips.
while i still hung over her in the agony of despair, i happened to look up.
the windows of the room had before been darkened, and i felt a kind of panic on seeing the pale yellow light of the moon illuminate the chamber.
the shutters had been thrown back, and with a sensation of horror not to be described, i saw at the open window a figure the most hideous and abhorred.
a grin was on the face of the monster; he seemed to jeer, as with his fiendish finger he pointed towards the corpse of my wife.
i rushed towards the window, and drawing a pistol from my bosom, fired; but he eluded me, leaped from his station, and running with the swiftness of lightning, plunged into the lake.
the report of the pistol brought a crowd into the room.
i pointed to the spot where he had disappeared, and we followed the track with boats; nets were cast, but in vain.
after passing several hours, we returned hopeless, most of my companions believing it to have been a form conjured up by my fancy.
after having landed, they proceeded to search the country, parties going in different directions among the woods and vines.
i attempted to accompany them and proceeded a short distance from the house, but my head whirled round, my steps were like those of a drunken man, i fell at last in a state of utter exhaustion; a film covered my eyes, and my skin was parched with the heat of fever.
in this state i was carried back and placed on a bed, hardly conscious of what had happened; my eyes wandered round the room as if to seek something that i had lost.
after an interval i arose, and as if by instinct, crawled into the room where the corpse of my beloved lay.
there were women weeping around; i hung over it and joined my sad tears to theirs; all this time no distinct idea presented itself to my mind, but my thoughts rambled to various subjects, reflecting confusedly on my misfortunes and their cause.
i was bewildered, in a cloud of wonder and horror.
the death of william, the execution of justine, the murder of clerval, and lastly of my wife; even at that moment i knew not that my only remaining friends were safe from the malignity of the fiend; my father even now might be writhing under his grasp, and ernest might be dead at his feet.
this idea made me shudder and recalled me to action.
i started up and resolved to return to geneva with all possible speed.
there were no horses to be procured, and i must return by the lake; but the wind was unfavourable, and the rain fell in torrents.
however, it was hardly morning, and i might reasonably hope to arrive by night.
i hired men to row and took an oar myself, for i had always experienced relief from mental torment in bodily exercise.
but the overflowing misery i now felt, and the excess of agitation that i endured rendered me incapable of any exertion.
i threw down the oar, and leaning my head upon my hands, gave way to every gloomy idea that arose.
if i looked up, i saw scenes which were familiar to me in my happier time and which i had contemplated but the day before in the company of her who was now but a shadow and a recollection.
tears streamed from my eyes.
the rain had ceased for a moment, and i saw the fish play in the waters as they had done a few hours before; they had then been observed by elizabeth.
nothing is so painful to the human mind as a great and sudden change.
the sun might shine or the clouds might lower, but nothing could appear to me as it had done the day before.
a fiend had snatched from me every hope of future happiness; no creature had ever been so miserable as i was; so frightful an event is single in the history of man.
but why should i dwell upon the incidents that followed this last overwhelming event?
mine has been a tale of horrors; i have reached their acme, and what i must now relate can but be tedious to you.
know that, one by one, my friends were snatched away; i was left desolate.
my own strength is exhausted, and i must tell, in a few words, what remains of my hideous narration.
i arrived at geneva.
my father and ernest yet lived, but the former sunk under the tidings that i bore.
i see him now, excellent and venerable old man!
his eyes wandered in vacancy, for they had lost their charm and their delighthis elizabeth, his more than daughter, whom he doted on with all that affection which a man feels, who in the decline of life, having few affections, clings more earnestly to those that remain.
cursed, cursed be the fiend that brought misery on his grey hairs and doomed him to waste in wretchedness!
he could not live under the horrors that were accumulated around him; the springs of existence suddenly gave way; he was unable to rise from his bed, and in a few days he died in my arms.
what then became of me?
i know not; i lost sensation, and chains and darkness were the only objects that pressed upon me.
sometimes, indeed, i dreamt that i wandered in flowery meadows and pleasant vales with the friends of my youth, but i awoke and found myself in a dungeon.
melancholy followed, but by degrees i gained a clear conception of my miseries and situation and was then released from my prison.
for they had called me mad, and during many months, as i understood, a solitary cell had been my habitation.
liberty, however, had been a useless gift to me, had i not, as i awakened to reason, at the same time awakened to revenge.
as the memory of past misfortunes pressed upon me, i began to reflect on their causethe monster whom i had created, the miserable dmon whom i had sent abroad into the world for my destruction.
i was possessed by a maddening rage when i thought of him, and desired and ardently prayed that i might have him within my grasp to wreak a great and signal revenge on his cursed head.
nor did my hate long confine itself to useless wishes; i began to reflect on the best means of securing him; and for this purpose, about a month after my release, i repaired to a criminal judge in the town and told him that i had an accusation to make, that i knew the destroyer of my family, and that i required him to exert his whole authority for the apprehension of the murderer.
the magistrate listened to me with attention and kindness.
be assured, sir, said he, no pains or exertions on my part shall be spared to discover the villain.
i thank you, replied i; listen, therefore, to the deposition that i have to make.
it is indeed a tale so strange that i should fear you would not credit it were there not something in truth which, however wonderful, forces conviction.
the story is too connected to be mistaken for a dream, and i have no motive for falsehood.
my manner as i thus addressed him was impressive but calm; i had formed in my own heart a resolution to pursue my destroyer to death, and this purpose quieted my agony and for an interval reconciled me to life.
i now related my history briefly but with firmness and precision, marking the dates with accuracy and never deviating into invective or exclamation.
the magistrate appeared at first perfectly incredulous, but as i continued he became more attentive and interested; i saw him sometimes shudder with horror; at others a lively surprise, unmingled with disbelief, was painted on his countenance.
when i had concluded my narration, i said, this is the being whom i accuse and for whose seizure and punishment i call upon you to exert your whole power.
it is your duty as a magistrate, and i believe and hope that your feelings as a man will not revolt from the execution of those functions on this occasion.
this address caused a considerable change in the physiognomy of my own auditor.
he had heard my story with that half kind of belief that is given to a tale of spirits and supernatural events; but when he was called upon to act officially in consequence, the whole tide of his incredulity returned.
he, however, answered mildly, i would willingly afford you every aid in your pursuit, but the creature of whom you speak appears to have powers which would put all my exertions to defiance.
who can follow an animal which can traverse the sea of ice and inhabit caves and dens where no man would venture to intrude?
besides, some months have elapsed since the commission of his crimes, and no one can conjecture to what place he has wandered or what region he may now inhabit.
i do not doubt that he hovers near the spot which i inhabit, and if he has indeed taken refuge in the alps, he may be hunted like the chamois and destroyed as a beast of prey.
but i perceive your thoughts; you do not credit my narrative and do not intend to pursue my enemy with the punishment which is his desert.
as i spoke, rage sparkled in my eyes; the magistrate was intimidated.
you are mistaken, said he.
i will exert myself, and if it is in my power to seize the monster, be assured that he shall suffer punishment proportionate to his crimes.
but i fear, from what you have yourself described to be his properties, that this will prove impracticable; and thus, while every proper measure is pursued, you should make up your mind to disappointment.
that cannot be; but all that i can say will be of little avail.
my revenge is of no moment to you; yet, while i allow it to be a vice, i confess that it is the devouring and only passion of my soul.
my rage is unspeakable when i reflect that the murderer, whom i have turned loose upon society, still exists.
you refuse my just demand; i have but one resource, and i devote myself, either in my life or death, to his destruction.
i trembled with excess of agitation as i said this; there was a frenzy in my manner, and something, i doubt not, of that haughty fierceness which the martyrs of old are said to have possessed.
but to a genevan magistrate, whose mind was occupied by far other ideas than those of devotion and heroism, this elevation of mind had much the appearance of madness.
he endeavoured to soothe me as a nurse does a child and reverted to my tale as the effects of delirium.
man, i cried, how ignorant art thou in thy pride of wisdom!
cease; you know not what it is you say.
i broke from the house angry and disturbed and retired to meditate on some other mode of action.
chapter 24 my present situation was one in which all voluntary thought was swallowed up and lost.
i was hurried away by fury; revenge alone endowed me with strength and composure; it moulded my feelings and allowed me to be calculating and calm at periods when otherwise delirium or death would have been my portion.
my first resolution was to quit geneva for ever; my country, which, when i was happy and beloved, was dear to me, now, in my adversity, became hateful.
i provided myself with a sum of money, together with a few jewels which had belonged to my mother, and departed.
and now my wanderings began which are to cease but with life.
i have traversed a vast portion of the earth and have endured all the hardships which travellers in deserts and barbarous countries are wont to meet.
how i have lived i hardly know; many times have i stretched my failing limbs upon the sandy plain and prayed for death.
but revenge kept me alive; i dared not die and leave my adversary in being.
when i quitted geneva my first labour was to gain some clue by which i might trace the steps of my fiendish enemy.
but my plan was unsettled, and i wandered many hours round the confines of the town, uncertain what path i should pursue.
as night approached i found myself at the entrance of the cemetery where william, elizabeth, and my father reposed.
i entered it and approached the tomb which marked their graves.
everything was silent except the leaves of the trees, which were gently agitated by the wind; the night was nearly dark, and the scene would have been solemn and affecting even to an uninterested observer.
the spirits of the departed seemed to flit around and to cast a shadow, which was felt but not seen, around the head of the mourner.
the deep grief which this scene had at first excited quickly gave way to rage and despair.
they were dead, and i lived; their murderer also lived, and to destroy him i must drag out my weary existence.
i knelt on the grass and kissed the earth and with quivering lips exclaimed, by the sacred earth on which i kneel, by the shades that wander near me, by the deep and eternal grief that i feel, i swear; and by thee, o night, and the spirits that preside over thee, to pursue the dmon who caused this misery, until he or i shall perish in mortal conflict.
for this purpose i will preserve my life; to execute this dear revenge will i again behold the sun and tread the green herbage of earth, which otherwise should vanish from my eyes for ever.
and i call on you, spirits of the dead, and on you, wandering ministers of vengeance, to aid and conduct me in my work.
let the cursed and hellish monster drink deep of agony; let him feel the despair that now torments me.
i had begun my adjuration with solemnity and an awe which almost assured me that the shades of my murdered friends heard and approved my devotion, but the furies possessed me as i concluded, and rage choked my utterance.
i was answered through the stillness of night by a loud and fiendish laugh.
it rang on my ears long and heavily; the mountains reechoed it, and i felt as if all hell surrounded me with mockery and laughter.
surely in that moment i should have been possessed by frenzy and have destroyed my miserable existence but that my vow was heard and that i was reserved for vengeance.
the laughter died away, when a wellknown and abhorred voice, apparently close to my ear, addressed me in an audible whisper, i am satisfied, miserable wretch!
you have determined to live, and i am satisfied.
i darted towards the spot from which the sound proceeded, but the devil eluded my grasp.
suddenly the broad disk of the moon arose and shone full upon his ghastly and distorted shape as he fled with more than mortal speed.
i pursued him, and for many months this has been my task.
guided by a slight clue, i followed the windings of the rhone, but vainly.
the blue mediterranean appeared, and by a strange chance, i saw the fiend enter by night and hide himself in a vessel bound for the black sea.
i took my passage in the same ship, but he escaped, i know not how.
amidst the wilds of tartary and russia, although he still evaded me, i have ever followed in his track.
sometimes the peasants, scared by this horrid apparition, informed me of his path; sometimes he himself, who feared that if i lost all trace of him i should despair and die, left some mark to guide me.
the snows descended on my head, and i saw the print of his huge step on the white plain.
to you first entering on life, to whom care is new and agony unknown, how can you understand what i have felt and still feel?
cold, want, and fatigue were the least pains which i was destined to endure; i was cursed by some devil and carried about with me my eternal hell; yet still a spirit of good followed and directed my steps and when i most murmured would suddenly extricate me from seemingly insurmountable difficulties.
sometimes, when nature, overcome by hunger, sank under the exhaustion, a repast was prepared for me in the desert that restored and inspirited me.
the fare was, indeed, coarse, such as the peasants of the country ate, but i will not doubt that it was set there by the spirits that i had invoked to aid me.
often, when all was dry, the heavens cloudless, and i was parched by thirst, a slight cloud would bedim the sky, shed the few drops that revived me, and vanish.
i followed, when i could, the courses of the rivers; but the dmon generally avoided these, as it was here that the population of the country chiefly collected.
in other places human beings were seldom seen, and i generally subsisted on the wild animals that crossed my path.
i had money with me and gained the friendship of the villagers by distributing it; or i brought with me some food that i had killed, which, after taking a small part, i always presented to those who had provided me with fire and utensils for cooking.
my life, as it passed thus, was indeed hateful to me, and it was during sleep alone that i could taste joy.
o blessed sleep!
often, when most miserable, i sank to repose, and my dreams lulled me even to rapture.
the spirits that guarded me had provided these moments, or rather hours, of happiness that i might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage.
deprived of this respite, i should have sunk under my hardships.
during the day i was sustained and inspirited by the hope of night, for in sleep i saw my friends, my wife, and my beloved country; again i saw the benevolent countenance of my father, heard the silver tones of my elizabeths voice, and beheld clerval enjoying health and youth.
often, when wearied by a toilsome march, i persuaded myself that i was dreaming until night should come and that i should then enjoy reality in the arms of my dearest friends.
what agonising fondness did i feel for them!
how did i cling to their dear forms, as sometimes they haunted even my waking hours, and persuade myself that they still lived!
at such moments vengeance, that burned within me, died in my heart, and i pursued my path towards the destruction of the dmon more as a task enjoined by heaven, as the mechanical impulse of some power of which i was unconscious, than as the ardent desire of my soul.
what his feelings were whom i pursued i cannot know.
sometimes, indeed, he left marks in writing on the barks of the trees or cut in stone that guided me and instigated my fury.
my reign is not yet overthese words were legible in one of these inscriptionsyou live, and my power is complete.
follow me; i seek the everlasting ices of the north, where you will feel the misery of cold and frost, to which i am impassive.
you will find near this place, if you follow not too tardily, a dead hare; eat and be refreshed.
come on, my enemy; we have yet to wrestle for our lives, but many hard and miserable hours must you endure until that period shall arrive.
scoffing devil!
again do i vow vengeance; again do i devote thee, miserable fiend, to torture and death.
never will i give up my search until he or i perish; and then with what ecstasy shall i join my elizabeth and my departed friends, who even now prepare for me the reward of my tedious toil and horrible pilgrimage!
as i still pursued my journey to the northward, the snows thickened and the cold increased in a degree almost too severe to support.
the peasants were shut up in their hovels, and only a few of the most hardy ventured forth to seize the animals whom starvation had forced from their hidingplaces to seek for prey.
the rivers were covered with ice, and no fish could be procured; and thus i was cut off from my chief article of maintenance.
the triumph of my enemy increased with the difficulty of my labours.
one inscription that he left was in these words: prepare!
your toils only begin; wrap yourself in furs and provide food, for we shall soon enter upon a journey where your sufferings will satisfy my everlasting hatred.
my courage and perseverance were invigorated by these scoffing words; i resolved not to fail in my purpose, and calling on heaven to support me, i continued with unabated fervour to traverse immense deserts, until the ocean appeared at a distance and formed the utmost boundary of the horizon.
oh!
how unlike it was to the blue seasons of the south!
covered with ice, it was only to be distinguished from land by its superior wildness and ruggedness.
the greeks wept for joy when they beheld the mediterranean from the hills of asia, and hailed with rapture the boundary of their toils.
i did not weep, but i knelt down and with a full heart thanked my guiding spirit for conducting me in safety to the place where i hoped, notwithstanding my adversarys gibe, to meet and grapple with him.
some weeks before this period i had procured a sledge and dogs and thus traversed the snows with inconceivable speed.
i know not whether the fiend possessed the same advantages, but i found that, as before i had daily lost ground in the pursuit, i now gained on him, so much so that when i first saw the ocean he was but one days journey in advance, and i hoped to intercept him before he should reach the beach.
with new courage, therefore, i pressed on, and in two days arrived at a wretched hamlet on the seashore.
i inquired of the inhabitants concerning the fiend and gained accurate information.
a gigantic monster, they said, had arrived the night before, armed with a gun and many pistols, putting to flight the inhabitants of a solitary cottage through fear of his terrific appearance.
he had carried off their store of winter food, and placing it in a sledge, to draw which he had seized on a numerous drove of trained dogs, he had harnessed them, and the same night, to the joy of the horrorstruck villagers, had pursued his journey across the sea in a direction that led to no land; and they conjectured that he must speedily be destroyed by the breaking of the ice or frozen by the eternal frosts.
on hearing this information i suffered a temporary access of despair.
he had escaped me, and i must commence a destructive and almost endless journey across the mountainous ices of the ocean, amidst cold that few of the inhabitants could long endure and which i, the native of a genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survive.
yet at the idea that the fiend should live and be triumphant, my rage and vengeance returned, and like a mighty tide, overwhelmed every other feeling.
after a slight repose, during which the spirits of the dead hovered round and instigated me to toil and revenge, i prepared for my journey.
i exchanged my landsledge for one fashioned for the inequalities of the frozen ocean, and purchasing a plentiful stock of provisions, i departed from land.
i cannot guess how many days have passed since then, but i have endured misery which nothing but the eternal sentiment of a just retribution burning within my heart could have enabled me to support.
immense and rugged mountains of ice often barred up my passage, and i often heard the thunder of the ground sea, which threatened my destruction.
but again the frost came and made the paths of the sea secure.
by the quantity of provision which i had consumed, i should guess that i had passed three weeks in this journey; and the continual protraction of hope, returning back upon the heart, often wrung bitter drops of despondency and grief from my eyes.
despair had indeed almost secured her prey, and i should soon have sunk beneath this misery.
once, after the poor animals that conveyed me had with incredible toil gained the summit of a sloping ice mountain, and one, sinking under his fatigue, died, i viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when suddenly my eye caught a dark speck upon the dusky plain.
i strained my sight to discover what it could be and uttered a wild cry of ecstasy when i distinguished a sledge and the distorted proportions of a wellknown form within.
oh!
with what a burning gush did hope revisit my heart!
warm tears filled my eyes, which i hastily wiped away, that they might not intercept the view i had of the dmon; but still my sight was dimmed by the burning drops, until, giving way to the emotions that oppressed me, i wept aloud.
but this was not the time for delay; i disencumbered the dogs of their dead companion, gave them a plentiful portion of food, and after an hours rest, which was absolutely necessary, and yet which was bitterly irksome to me, i continued my route.
the sledge was still visible, nor did i again lose sight of it except at the moments when for a short time some icerock concealed it with its intervening crags.
i indeed perceptibly gained on it, and when, after nearly two days journey, i beheld my enemy at no more than a mile distant, my heart bounded within me.
but now, when i appeared almost within grasp of my foe, my hopes were suddenly extinguished, and i lost all trace of him more utterly than i had ever done before.
a ground sea was heard; the thunder of its progress, as the waters rolled and swelled beneath me, became every moment more ominous and terrific.
i pressed on, but in vain.
the wind arose; the sea roared; and, as with the mighty shock of an earthquake, it split and cracked with a tremendous and overwhelming sound.
the work was soon finished; in a few minutes a tumultuous sea rolled between me and my enemy, and i was left drifting on a scattered piece of ice that was continually lessening and thus preparing for me a hideous death.
in this manner many appalling hours passed; several of my dogs died, and i myself was about to sink under the accumulation of distress when i saw your vessel riding at anchor and holding forth to me hopes of succour and life.
i had no conception that vessels ever came so far north and was astounded at the sight.
i quickly destroyed part of my sledge to construct oars, and by these means was enabled, with infinite fatigue, to move my ice raft in the direction of your ship.
i had determined, if you were going southwards, still to trust myself to the mercy of the seas rather than abandon my purpose.
i hoped to induce you to grant me a boat with which i could pursue my enemy.
but your direction was northwards.
you took me on board when my vigour was exhausted, and i should soon have sunk under my multiplied hardships into a death which i still dread, for my task is unfulfilled.
oh!
when will my guiding spirit, in conducting me to the dmon, allow me the rest i so much desire; or must i die, and he yet live?
if i do, swear to me, walton, that he shall not escape, that you will seek him and satisfy my vengeance in his death.
and do i dare to ask of you to undertake my pilgrimage, to endure the hardships that i have undergone?
no; i am not so selfish.
yet, when i am dead, if he should appear, if the ministers of vengeance should conduct him to you, swear that he shall not liveswear that he shall not triumph over my accumulated woes and survive to add to the list of his dark crimes.
he is eloquent and persuasive, and once his words had even power over my heart; but trust him not.
his soul is as hellish as his form, full of treachery and fiendlike malice.
hear him not; call on the names of william, justine, clerval, elizabeth, my father, and of the wretched victor, and thrust your sword into his heart.
i will hover near and direct the steel aright.
walton, in continuation.
august 26th, 17. you have read this strange and terrific story, margaret; and do you not feel your blood congeal with horror, like that which even now curdles mine?
sometimes, seized with sudden agony, he could not continue his tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with difficulty the words so replete with anguish.
his fine and lovely eyes were now lighted up with indignation, now subdued to downcast sorrow and quenched in infinite wretchedness.
sometimes he commanded his countenance and tones and related the most horrible incidents with a tranquil voice, suppressing every mark of agitation; then, like a volcano bursting forth, his face would suddenly change to an expression of the wildest rage as he shrieked out imprecations on his persecutor.
his tale is connected and told with an appearance of the simplest truth, yet i own to you that the letters of felix and safie, which he showed me, and the apparition of the monster seen from our ship, brought to me a greater conviction of the truth of his narrative than his asseverations, however earnest and connected.
such a monster has, then, really existence!
i cannot doubt it, yet i am lost in surprise and admiration.
sometimes i endeavoured to gain from frankenstein the particulars of his creatures formation, but on this point he was impenetrable.
are you mad, my friend?
said he.
or whither does your senseless curiosity lead you?
would you also create for yourself and the world a demoniacal enemy?
peace, peace!
learn my miseries and do not seek to increase your own.
frankenstein discovered that i made notes concerning his history; he asked to see them and then himself corrected and augmented them in many places, but principally in giving the life and spirit to the conversations he held with his enemy.
since you have preserved my narration, said he, i would not that a mutilated one should go down to posterity.
thus has a week passed away, while i have listened to the strangest tale that ever imagination formed.
my thoughts and every feeling of my soul have been drunk up by the interest for my guest which this tale and his own elevated and gentle manners have created.
i wish to soothe him, yet can i counsel one so infinitely miserable, so destitute of every hope of consolation, to live?
oh, no!
the only joy that he can now know will be when he composes his shattered spirit to peace and death.
yet he enjoys one comfort, the offspring of solitude and delirium; he believes that when in dreams he holds converse with his friends and derives from that communion consolation for his miseries or excitements to his vengeance, that they are not the creations of his fancy, but the beings themselves who visit him from the regions of a remote world.
this faith gives a solemnity to his reveries that render them to me almost as imposing and interesting as truth.
our conversations are not always confined to his own history and misfortunes.
on every point of general literature he displays unbounded knowledge and a quick and piercing apprehension.
his eloquence is forcible and touching; nor can i hear him, when he relates a pathetic incident or endeavours to move the passions of pity or love, without tears.
what a glorious creature must he have been in the days of his prosperity, when he is thus noble and godlike in ruin!
he seems to feel his own worth and the greatness of his fall.
when younger, said he, i believed myself destined for some great enterprise.
my feelings are profound, but i possessed a coolness of judgment that fitted me for illustrious achievements.
this sentiment of the worth of my nature supported me when others would have been oppressed, for i deemed it criminal to throw away in useless grief those talents that might be useful to my fellow creatures.
when i reflected on the work i had completed, no less a one than the creation of a sensitive and rational animal, i could not rank myself with the herd of common projectors.
but this thought, which supported me in the commencement of my career, now serves only to plunge me lower in the dust.
all my speculations and hopes are as nothing, and like the archangel who aspired to omnipotence, i am chained in an eternal hell.
my imagination was vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application were intense; by the union of these qualities i conceived the idea and executed the creation of a man.
even now i cannot recollect without passion my reveries while the work was incomplete.
i trod heaven in my thoughts, now exulting in my powers, now burning with the idea of their effects.
from my infancy i was imbued with high hopes and a lofty ambition; but how am i sunk!
oh!
my friend, if you had known me as i once was, you would not recognise me in this state of degradation.
despondency rarely visited my heart; a high destiny seemed to bear me on, until i fell, never, never again to rise.
must i then lose this admirable being?
i have longed for a friend; i have sought one who would sympathise with and love me.
behold, on these desert seas i have found such a one, but i fear i have gained him only to know his value and lose him.
i would reconcile him to life, but he repulses the idea.
i thank you, walton, he said, for your kind intentions towards so miserable a wretch; but when you speak of new ties and fresh affections, think you that any can replace those who are gone?
can any man be to me as clerval was, or any woman another elizabeth?
even where the affections are not strongly moved by any superior excellence, the companions of our childhood always possess a certain power over our minds which hardly any later friend can obtain.
they know our infantine dispositions, which, however they may be afterwards modified, are never eradicated; and they can judge of our actions with more certain conclusions as to the integrity of our motives.
a sister or a brother can never, unless indeed such symptoms have been shown early, suspect the other of fraud or false dealing, when another friend, however strongly he may be attached, may, in spite of himself, be contemplated with suspicion.
but i enjoyed friends, dear not only through habit and association, but from their own merits; and wherever i am, the soothing voice of my elizabeth and the conversation of clerval will be ever whispered in my ear.
they are dead, and but one feeling in such a solitude can persuade me to preserve my life.
if i were engaged in any high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive utility to my fellow creatures, then could i live to fulfil it.
but such is not my destiny; i must pursue and destroy the being to whom i gave existence; then my lot on earth will be fulfilled and i may die.
my beloved sister, september 2d.
i write to you, encompassed by peril and ignorant whether i am ever doomed to see again dear england and the dearer friends that inhabit it.
i am surrounded by mountains of ice which admit of no escape and threaten every moment to crush my vessel.
the brave fellows whom i have persuaded to be my companions look towards me for aid, but i have none to bestow.
there is something terribly appalling in our situation, yet my courage and hopes do not desert me.
yet it is terrible to reflect that the lives of all these men are endangered through me.
if we are lost, my mad schemes are the cause.
and what, margaret, will be the state of your mind?
you will not hear of my destruction, and you will anxiously await my return.
years will pass, and you will have visitings of despair and yet be tortured by hope.
oh!
my beloved sister, the sickening failing of your heartfelt expectations is, in prospect, more terrible to me than my own death.
but you have a husband and lovely children; you may be happy.
heaven bless you and make you so!
my unfortunate guest regards me with the tenderest compassion.
he endeavours to fill me with hope and talks as if life were a possession which he valued.
he reminds me how often the same accidents have happened to other navigators who have attempted this sea, and in spite of myself, he fills me with cheerful auguries.
even the sailors feel the power of his eloquence; when he speaks, they no longer despair; he rouses their energies, and while they hear his voice they believe these vast mountains of ice are molehills which will vanish before the resolutions of man.
these feelings are transitory; each day of expectation delayed fills them with fear, and i almost dread a mutiny caused by this despair.
september 5th.
a scene has just passed of such uncommon interest that, although it is highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet i cannot forbear recording it.
we are still surrounded by mountains of ice, still in imminent danger of being crushed in their conflict.
the cold is excessive, and many of my unfortunate comrades have already found a grave amidst this scene of desolation.
frankenstein has daily declined in health; a feverish fire still glimmers in his eyes, but he is exhausted, and when suddenly roused to any exertion, he speedily sinks again into apparent lifelessness.
i mentioned in my last letter the fears i entertained of a mutiny.
this morning, as i sat watching the wan countenance of my friendhis eyes half closed and his limbs hanging listlesslyi was roused by half a dozen of the sailors, who demanded admission into the cabin.
they entered, and their leader addressed me.
he told me that he and his companions had been chosen by the other sailors to come in deputation to me to make me a requisition which, in justice, i could not refuse.
we were immured in ice and should probably never escape, but they feared that if, as was possible, the ice should dissipate and a free passage be opened, i should be rash enough to continue my voyage and lead them into fresh dangers, after they might happily have surmounted this.
they insisted, therefore, that i should engage with a solemn promise that if the vessel should be freed i would instantly direct my course southwards.
this speech troubled me.
i had not despaired, nor had i yet conceived the idea of returning if set free.
yet could i, in justice, or even in possibility, refuse this demand?
i hesitated before i answered, when frankenstein, who had at first been silent, and indeed appeared hardly to have force enough to attend, now roused himself; his eyes sparkled, and his cheeks flushed with momentary vigour.
turning towards the men, he said, what do you mean?
what do you demand of your captain?
are you, then, so easily turned from your design?
did you not call this a glorious expedition?
and wherefore was it glorious?
not because the way was smooth and placid as a southern sea, but because it was full of dangers and terror, because at every new incident your fortitude was to be called forth and your courage exhibited, because danger and death surrounded it, and these you were to brave and overcome.
for this was it a glorious, for this was it an honourable undertaking.
you were hereafter to be hailed as the benefactors of your species, your names adored as belonging to brave men who encountered death for honour and the benefit of mankind.
and now, behold, with the first imagination of danger, or, if you will, the first mighty and terrific trial of your courage, you shrink away and are content to be handed down as men who had not strength enough to endure cold and peril; and so, poor souls, they were chilly and returned to their warm firesides.
why, that requires not this preparation; ye need not have come thus far and dragged your captain to the shame of a defeat merely to prove yourselves cowards.
oh!
be men, or be more than men.
be steady to your purposes and firm as a rock.
this ice is not made of such stuff as your hearts may be; it is mutable and cannot withstand you if you say that it shall not.
do not return to your families with the stigma of disgrace marked on your brows.
return as heroes who have fought and conquered and who know not what it is to turn their backs on the foe.
he spoke this with a voice so modulated to the different feelings expressed in his speech, with an eye so full of lofty design and heroism, that can you wonder that these men were moved?
they looked at one another and were unable to reply.
i spoke; i told them to retire and consider of what had been said, that i would not lead them farther north if they strenuously desired the contrary, but that i hoped that, with reflection, their courage would return.
they retired and i turned towards my friend, but he was sunk in languor and almost deprived of life.
how all this will terminate, i know not, but i had rather die than return shamefully, my purpose unfulfilled.
yet i fear such will be my fate; the men, unsupported by ideas of glory and honour, can never willingly continue to endure their present hardships.
september 7th.
the die is cast; i have consented to return if we are not destroyed.
thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; i come back ignorant and disappointed.
it requires more philosophy than i possess to bear this injustice with patience.
september 12th.
it is past; i am returning to england.
i have lost my hopes of utility and glory; i have lost my friend.
but i will endeavour to detail these bitter circumstances to you, my dear sister; and while i am wafted towards england and towards you, i will not despond.
september 9th, the ice began to move, and roarings like thunder were heard at a distance as the islands split and cracked in every direction.
we were in the most imminent peril, but as we could only remain passive, my chief attention was occupied by my unfortunate guest whose illness increased in such a degree that he was entirely confined to his bed.
the ice cracked behind us and was driven with force towards the north; a breeze sprang from the west, and on the 11th the passage towards the south became perfectly free.
when the sailors saw this and that their return to their native country was apparently assured, a shout of tumultuous joy broke from them, loud and longcontinued.
frankenstein, who was dozing, awoke and asked the cause of the tumult.
they shout, i said, because they will soon return to england.
do you, then, really return?
alas!
yes; i cannot withstand their demands.
i cannot lead them unwillingly to danger, and i must return.
do so, if you will; but i will not.
you may give up your purpose, but mine is assigned to me by heaven, and i dare not.
i am weak, but surely the spirits who assist my vengeance will endow me with sufficient strength.
saying this, he endeavoured to spring from the bed, but the exertion was too great for him; he fell back and fainted.
it was long before he was restored, and i often thought that life was entirely extinct.
at length he opened his eyes; he breathed with difficulty and was unable to speak.
the surgeon gave him a composing draught and ordered us to leave him undisturbed.
in the meantime he told me that my friend had certainly not many hours to live.
his sentence was pronounced, and i could only grieve and be patient.
i sat by his bed, watching him; his eyes were closed, and i thought he slept; but presently he called to me in a feeble voice, and bidding me come near, said, alas!
the strength i relied on is gone; i feel that i shall soon die, and he, my enemy and persecutor, may still be in being.
think not, walton, that in the last moments of my existence i feel that burning hatred and ardent desire of revenge i once expressed; but i feel myself justified in desiring the death of my adversary.
during these last days i have been occupied in examining my past conduct; nor do i find it blamable.
in a fit of enthusiastic madness i created a rational creature and was bound towards him to assure, as far as was in my power, his happiness and wellbeing.
this was my duty, but there was another still paramount to that.
my duties towards the beings of my own species had greater claims to my attention because they included a greater proportion of happiness or misery.
urged by this view, i refused, and i did right in refusing, to create a companion for the first creature.
he showed unparalleled malignity and selfishness in evil; he destroyed my friends; he devoted to destruction beings who possessed exquisite sensations, happiness, and wisdom; nor do i know where this thirst for vengeance may end.
miserable himself that he may render no other wretched, he ought to die.
the task of his destruction was mine, but i have failed.
when actuated by selfish and vicious motives, i asked you to undertake my unfinished work, and i renew this request now, when i am only induced by reason and virtue.
yet i cannot ask you to renounce your country and friends to fulfil this task; and now that you are returning to england, you will have little chance of meeting with him.
but the consideration of these points, and the well balancing of what you may esteem your duties, i leave to you; my judgment and ideas are already disturbed by the near approach of death.
i dare not ask you to do what i think right, for i may still be misled by passion.
that he should live to be an instrument of mischief disturbs me; in other respects, this hour, when i momentarily expect my release, is the only happy one which i have enjoyed for several years.
the forms of the beloved dead flit before me, and i hasten to their arms.
farewell, walton!
seek happiness in tranquillity and avoid ambition, even if it be only the apparently innocent one of distinguishing yourself in science and discoveries.
yet why do i say this?
i have myself been blasted in these hopes, yet another may succeed.
his voice became fainter as he spoke, and at length, exhausted by his effort, he sank into silence.
about half an hour afterwards he attempted again to speak but was unable; he pressed my hand feebly, and his eyes closed for ever, while the irradiation of a gentle smile passed away from his lips.
margaret, what comment can i make on the untimely extinction of this glorious spirit?
what can i say that will enable you to understand the depth of my sorrow?
all that i should express would be inadequate and feeble.
my tears flow; my mind is overshadowed by a cloud of disappointment.
but i journey towards england, and i may there find consolation.
i am interrupted.
what do these sounds portend?
it is midnight; the breeze blows fairly, and the watch on deck scarcely stir.
again there is a sound as of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin where the remains of frankenstein still lie.
i must arise and examine.
good night, my sister.
great god!
what a scene has just taken place!
i am yet dizzy with the remembrance of it.
i hardly know whether i shall have the power to detail it; yet the tale which i have recorded would be incomplete without this final and wonderful catastrophe.
i entered the cabin where lay the remains of my illfated and admirable friend.
over him hung a form which i cannot find words to describegigantic in stature, yet uncouth and distorted in its proportions.
as he hung over the coffin, his face was concealed by long locks of ragged hair; but one vast hand was extended, in colour and apparent texture like that of a mummy.
when he heard the sound of my approach, he ceased to utter exclamations of grief and horror and sprung towards the window.
never did i behold a vision so horrible as his face, of such loathsome yet appalling hideousness.
i shut my eyes involuntarily and endeavoured to recollect what were my duties with regard to this destroyer.
i called on him to stay.
he paused, looking on me with wonder, and again turning towards the lifeless form of his creator, he seemed to forget my presence, and every feature and gesture seemed instigated by the wildest rage of some uncontrollable passion.
that is also my victim!
he exclaimed.
in his murder my crimes are consummated; the miserable series of my being is wound to its close!
oh, frankenstein!
generous and selfdevoted being!
what does it avail that i now ask thee to pardon me?
i, who irretrievably destroyed thee by destroying all thou lovedst.
alas!
he is cold, he cannot answer me.
his voice seemed suffocated, and my first impulses, which had suggested to me the duty of obeying the dying request of my friend in destroying his enemy, were now suspended by a mixture of curiosity and compassion.
i approached this tremendous being; i dared not again raise my eyes to his face, there was something so scaring and unearthly in his ugliness.
i attempted to speak, but the words died away on my lips.
the monster continued to utter wild and incoherent selfreproaches.
at length i gathered resolution to address him in a pause of the tempest of his passion.
your repentance, i said, is now superfluous.
if you had listened to the voice of conscience and heeded the stings of remorse before you had urged your diabolical vengeance to this extremity, frankenstein would yet have lived.
and do you dream?
said the dmon.
do you think that i was then dead to agony and remorse?
he, he continued, pointing to the corpse, he suffered not in the consummation of the deed.
oh!
not the tenthousandth portion of the anguish that was mine during the lingering detail of its execution.
a frightful selfishness hurried me on, while my heart was poisoned with remorse.
think you that the groans of clerval were music to my ears?
my heart was fashioned to be susceptible of love and sympathy, and when wrenched by misery to vice and hatred, it did not endure the violence of the change without torture such as you cannot even imagine.
after the murder of clerval i returned to switzerland, heartbroken and overcome.
i pitied frankenstein; my pity amounted to horror; i abhorred myself.
but when i discovered that he, the author at once of my existence and of its unspeakable torments, dared to hope for happiness, that while he accumulated wretchedness and despair upon me he sought his own enjoyment in feelings and passions from the indulgence of which i was for ever barred, then impotent envy and bitter indignation filled me with an insatiable thirst for vengeance.
i recollected my threat and resolved that it should be accomplished.
i knew that i was preparing for myself a deadly torture, but i was the slave, not the master, of an impulse which i detested yet could not disobey.
yet when she died!
nay, then i was not miserable.
i had cast off all feeling, subdued all anguish, to riot in the excess of my despair.
evil thenceforth became my good.
urged thus far, i had no choice but to adapt my nature to an element which i had willingly chosen.
the completion of my demoniacal design became an insatiable passion.
and now it is ended; there is my last victim!
i was at first touched by the expressions of his misery; yet, when i called to mind what frankenstein had said of his powers of eloquence and persuasion, and when i again cast my eyes on the lifeless form of my friend, indignation was rekindled within me.
wretch!
i said.
it is well that you come here to whine over the desolation that you have made.
you throw a torch into a pile of buildings, and when they are consumed, you sit among the ruins and lament the fall.
hypocritical fiend!
if he whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object, again would he become the prey, of your accursed vengeance.
it is not pity that you feel; you lament only because the victim of your malignity is withdrawn from your power.
oh, it is not thusnot thus, interrupted the being.
yet such must be the impression conveyed to you by what appears to be the purport of my actions.
yet i seek not a fellow feeling in my misery.
no sympathy may i ever find.
when i first sought it, it was the love of virtue, the feelings of happiness and affection with which my whole being overflowed, that i wished to be participated.
but now that virtue has become to me a shadow, and that happiness and affection are turned into bitter and loathing despair, in what should i seek for sympathy?
i am content to suffer alone while my sufferings shall endure; when i die, i am well satisfied that abhorrence and opprobrium should load my memory.
once my fancy was soothed with dreams of virtue, of fame, and of enjoyment.
once i falsely hoped to meet with beings who, pardoning my outward form, would love me for the excellent qualities which i was capable of unfolding.
i was nourished with high thoughts of honour and devotion.
but now crime has degraded me beneath the meanest animal.
no guilt, no mischief, no malignity, no misery, can be found comparable to mine.
when i run over the frightful catalogue of my sins, i cannot believe that i am the same creature whose thoughts were once filled with sublime and transcendent visions of the beauty and the majesty of goodness.
but it is even so; the fallen angel becomes a malignant devil.
yet even that enemy of god and man had friends and associates in his desolation; i am alone.
you, who call frankenstein your friend, seem to have a knowledge of my crimes and his misfortunes.
but in the detail which he gave you of them he could not sum up the hours and months of misery which i endured wasting in impotent passions.
for while i destroyed his hopes, i did not satisfy my own desires.
they were for ever ardent and craving; still i desired love and fellowship, and i was still spurned.
was there no injustice in this?
am i to be thought the only criminal, when all humankind sinned against me?
why do you not hate felix, who drove his friend from his door with contumely?
why do you not execrate the rustic who sought to destroy the saviour of his child?
nay, these are virtuous and immaculate beings!
i, the miserable and the abandoned, am an abortion, to be spurned at, and kicked, and trampled on.
even now my blood boils at the recollection of this injustice.
but it is true that i am a wretch.
i have murdered the lovely and the helpless; i have strangled the innocent as they slept and grasped to death his throat who never injured me or any other living thing.
i have devoted my creator, the select specimen of all that is worthy of love and admiration among men, to misery; i have pursued him even to that irremediable ruin.
there he lies, white and cold in death.
you hate me, but your abhorrence cannot equal that with which i regard myself.
i look on the hands which executed the deed; i think on the heart in which the imagination of it was conceived and long for the moment when these hands will meet my eyes, when that imagination will haunt my thoughts no more.
fear not that i shall be the instrument of future mischief.
my work is nearly complete.
neither yours nor any mans death is needed to consummate the series of my being and accomplish that which must be done, but it requires my own.
do not think that i shall be slow to perform this sacrifice.
i shall quit your vessel on the ice raft which brought me thither and shall seek the most northern extremity of the globe; i shall collect my funeral pile and consume to ashes this miserable frame, that its remains may afford no light to any curious and unhallowed wretch who would create such another as i have been.
i shall die.
i shall no longer feel the agonies which now consume me or be the prey of feelings unsatisfied, yet unquenched.
he is dead who called me into being; and when i shall be no more, the very remembrance of us both will speedily vanish.
i shall no longer see the sun or stars or feel the winds play on my cheeks.
light, feeling, and sense will pass away; and in this condition must i find my happiness.
some years ago, when the images which this world affords first opened upon me, when i felt the cheering warmth of summer and heard the rustling of the leaves and the warbling of the birds, and these were all to me, i should have wept to die; now it is my only consolation.
polluted by crimes and torn by the bitterest remorse, where can i find rest but in death?
farewell!
i leave you, and in you the last of humankind whom these eyes will ever behold.
farewell, frankenstein!
if thou wert yet alive and yet cherished a desire of revenge against me, it would be better satiated in my life than in my destruction.
but it was not so; thou didst seek my extinction, that i might not cause greater wretchedness; and if yet, in some mode unknown to me, thou hadst not ceased to think and feel, thou wouldst not desire against me a vengeance greater than that which i feel.
blasted as thou wert, my agony was still superior to thine, for the bitter sting of remorse will not cease to rankle in my wounds until death shall close them for ever.
but soon, he cried with sad and solemn enthusiasm, i shall die, and what i now feel be no longer felt.
soon these burning miseries will be extinct.
i shall ascend my funeral pile triumphantly and exult in the agony of the torturing flames.
the light of that conflagration will fade away; my ashes will be swept into the sea by the winds.
my spirit will sleep in peace, or if it thinks, it will not surely think thus.
farewell.
he sprang from the cabinwindow as he said this, upon the ice raft which lay close to the vessel.
he was soon borne away by the waves and lost in darkness and distance.
end of the project gutenberg ebook 84
start of the project gutenberg ebook 1342  illustration: george allen publisher 156 charing cross road london ruskin house  illustration: reading janes letters.
chap 34.  pride.
and prejudice by jane austen, with a preface by george saintsbury and illustrations by hugh thomson illustration: 1894 ruskin 156. charing house.
cross road.
london george allen.
chiswick press:charles whittingham and co. tooks court, chancery lane, london.
illustration: to j. comyns carr in acknowledgment of all i owe to his friendship and advice, these illustrations are gratefully inscribed hugh thomson  preface.
illustration walt whitman has somewhere a fine and just distinction between loving by allowance and loving with personal love.
this distinction applies to books as well as to men and women; and in the case of the not very numerous authors who are the objects of the personal affection, it brings a curious consequence with it.
there is much more difference as to their best work than in the case of those others who are loved by allowance by convention, and because it is felt to be the right and proper thing to love them.
and in the sectfairly large and yet unusually choiceof austenians or janites, there would probably be found partisans of the claim to primacy of almost every one of the novels.
to some the delightful freshness and humour of northanger abbey, its completeness, finish, and entrain, obscure the undoubted critical facts that its scale is small, and its scheme, after all, that of burlesque or parody, a kind in which the first rank is reached with difficulty.
persuasion, relatively faint in tone, and not enthralling in interest, has devotees who exalt above all the others its exquisite delicacy and keeping.
the catastrophe of mansfield park is admittedly theatrical, the hero and heroine are insipid, and the author has almost wickedly destroyed all romantic interest by expressly admitting that edmund only took fanny because mary shocked him, and that fanny might very likely have taken crawford if he had been a little more assiduous; yet the matchless rehearsalscenes and the characters of mrs. norris and others have secured, i believe, a considerable party for it.
sense and sensibility has perhaps the fewest outandout admirers; but it does not want them.
i suppose, however, that the majority of at least competent votes would, all things considered, be divided between emma and the present book; and perhaps the vulgar verdict (if indeed a fondness for miss austen be not of itself a patent of exemption from any possible charge of vulgarity) would go for emma.
it is the larger, the more varied, the more popular; the author had by the time of its composition seen rather more of the world, and had improved her general, though not her most peculiar and characteristic dialogue; such figures as miss bates, as the eltons, cannot but unite the suffrages of everybody.
on the other hand, i, for my part, declare for pride and prejudice unhesitatingly.
it seems to me the most perfect, the most characteristic, the most eminently quintessential of its authors works; and for this contention in such narrow space as is permitted to me, i propose here to show cause.
in the first place, the book (it may be barely necessary to remind the reader) was in its first shape written very early, somewhere about 1796, when miss austen was barely twentyone; though it was revised and finished at chawton some fifteen years later, and was not published till 1813, only four years before her death.
i do not know whether, in this combination of the fresh and vigorous projection of youth, and the critical revision of middle life, there may be traced the distinct superiority in point of construction, which, as it seems to me, it possesses over all the others.
the plot, though not elaborate, is almost regular enough for fielding; hardly a character, hardly an incident could be retrenched without loss to the story.
the elopement of lydia and wickham is not, like that of crawford and mrs. rushworth, a coup de thtre; it connects itself in the strictest way with the course of the story earlier, and brings about the denouement with complete propriety.
all the minor passagesthe loves of jane and bingley, the advent of mr. collins, the visit to hunsford, the derbyshire tourfit in after the same unostentatious, but masterly fashion.
there is no attempt at the hideandseek, inandout business, which in the transactions between frank churchill and jane fairfax contributes no doubt a good deal to the intrigue of emma, but contributes it in a fashion which i do not think the best feature of that otherwise admirable book.
although miss austen always liked something of the misunderstanding kind, which afforded her opportunities for the display of the peculiar and incomparable talent to be noticed presently, she has been satisfied here with the perfectly natural occasions provided by the false account of darcys conduct given by wickham, and by the awkwardness (arising with equal naturalness) from the gradual transformation of elizabeths own feelings from positive aversion to actual love.
i do not know whether the allgrasping hand of the playwright has ever been laid upon pride and prejudice; and i dare say that, if it were, the situations would prove not startling or garish enough for the footlights, the characterscheme too subtle and delicate for pit and gallery.
but if the attempt were made, it would certainly not be hampered by any of those loosenesses of construction, which, sometimes disguised by the conveniences of which the novelist can avail himself, appear at once on the stage.
i think, however, though the thought will doubtless seem heretical to more than one school of critics, that construction is not the highest merit, the choicest gift, of the novelist.
it sets off his other gifts and graces most advantageously to the critical eye; and the want of it will sometimes mar those gracesappreciably, though not quite consciouslyto eyes by no means ultracritical.
but a very badlybuilt novel which excelled in pathetic or humorous character, or which displayed consummate command of dialogueperhaps the rarest of all facultieswould be an infinitely better thing than a faultless plot acted and told by puppets with pebbles in their mouths.
and despite the ability which miss austen has shown in working out the story, i for one should put pride and prejudice far lower if it did not contain what seem to me the very masterpieces of miss austens humour and of her faculty of charactercreationmasterpieces who may indeed admit john thorpe, the eltons, mrs. norris, and one or two others to their company, but who, in one instance certainly, and perhaps in others, are still superior to them.
the characteristics of miss austens humour are so subtle and delicate that they are, perhaps, at all times easier to apprehend than to express, and at any particular time likely to be differently apprehended by different persons.
to me this humour seems to possess a greater affinity, on the whole, to that of addison than to any other of the numerous species of this great british genus.
the differences of scheme, of time, of subject, of literary convention, are, of course, obvious enough; the difference of sex does not, perhaps, count for much, for there was a distinctly feminine element in mr. spectator, and in jane austens genius there was, though nothing mannish, much that was masculine.
but the likeness of quality consists in a great number of common subdivisions of qualitydemureness, extreme minuteness of touch, avoidance of loud tones and glaring effects.
also there is in both a certain not inhuman or unamiable cruelty.
it is the custom with those who judge grossly to contrast the good nature of addison with the savagery of swift, the mildness of miss austen with the boisterousness of fielding and smollett, even with the ferocious practical jokes that her immediate predecessor, miss burney, allowed without very much protest.
yet, both in mr. addison and in miss austen there is, though a restrained and wellmannered, an insatiable and ruthless delight in roasting and cutting up a fool.
a man in the early eighteenth century, of course, could push this taste further than a lady in the early nineteenth; and no doubt miss austens principles, as well as her heart, would have shrunk from such things as the letter from the unfortunate husband in the spectator, who describes, with all the gusto and all the innocence in the world, how his wife and his friend induce him to play at blindmansbuff.
but another spectator letterthat of the damsel of fourteen who wishes to marry mr. shapely, and assures her selected mentor that he admires your spectators mightilymight have been written by a rather more ladylike and intelligent lydia bennet in the days of lydias greatgrandmother; while, on the other hand, some (i think unreasonably) have found cynicism in touches of miss austens own, such as her satire of mrs. musgroves selfdeceiving regrets over her son.
but this word cynical is one of the most misused in the english language, especially when, by a glaring and gratuitous falsification of its original sense, it is applied, not to rough and snarling invective, but to gentle and oblique satire.
if cynicism means the perception of the other side, the sense of the accepted hells beneath, the consciousness that motives are nearly always mixed, and that to seem is not identical with to beif this be cynicism, then every man and woman who is not a fool, who does not care to live in a fools paradise, who has knowledge of nature and the world and life, is a cynic.
and in that sense miss austen certainly was one.
she may even have been one in the further sense that, like her own mr. bennet, she took an epicurean delight in dissecting, in displaying, in setting at work her fools and her mean persons.
i think she did take this delight, and i do not think at all the worse of her for it as a woman, while she was immensely the better for it as an artist.
in respect of her art generally, mr. goldwin smith has truly observed that metaphor has been exhausted in depicting the perfection of it, combined with the narrowness of her field; and he has justly added that we need not go beyond her own comparison to the art of a miniature painter.
to make this latter observation quite exact we must not use the term miniature in its restricted sense, and must think rather of memling at one end of the history of painting and meissonier at the other, than of cosway or any of his kind.
and i am not so certain that i should myself use the word narrow in connection with her.
if her world is a microcosm, the cosmic quality of it is at least as eminent as the littleness.
she does not touch what she did not feel herself called to paint; i am not so sure that she could not have painted what she did not feel herself called to touch.
it is at least remarkable that in two very short periods of writingone of about three years, and another of not much more than fiveshe executed six capital works, and has not left a single failure.
it is possible that the romantic paste in her composition was defective: we must always remember that hardly anybody born in her decadethat of the eighteenthcentury seventiesindependently exhibited the full romantic quality.
even scott required hill and mountain and ballad, even coleridge metaphysics and german to enable them to chip the classical shell.
miss austen was an english girl, brought up in a country retirement, at the time when ladies went back into the house if there was a white frost which might pierce their kid shoes, when a sudden cold was the subject of the gravest fears, when their studies, their ways, their conduct were subject to all those fantastic limits and restrictions against which mary wollstonecraft protested with better general sense than particular taste or judgment.
miss austen, too, drew back when the white frost touched her shoes; but i think she would have made a pretty good journey even in a black one.
for if her knowledge was not very extended, she knew two things which only genius knows.
the one was humanity, and the other was art.
on the first head she could not make a mistake; her men, though limited, are true, and her women are, in the old sense, absolute.
as to art, if she has never tried idealism, her realism is real to a degree which makes the false realism of our own day look merely deadalive.
take almost any frenchman, except the late m. de maupassant, and watch him laboriously piling up strokes in the hope of giving a complete impression.
you get none; you are lucky if, discarding twothirds of what he gives, you can shape a real impression out of the rest.
but with miss austen the myriad, trivial, unforced strokes build up the picture like magic.
nothing is false; nothing is superfluous.
when (to take the present book only) mr. collins changed his mind from jane to elizabeth while mrs. bennet was stirring the fire (and we know how mrs. bennet would have stirred the fire), when mr. darcy brought his coffeecup back himself, the touch in each case is like that of swifttaller by the breadth of my nailwhich impressed the halfreluctant thackeray with just and outspoken admiration.
indeed, fantastic as it may seem, i should put miss austen as near to swift in some ways, as i have put her to addison in others.
this swiftian quality appears in the present novel as it appears nowhere else in the character of the immortal, the ineffable mr. collins.
mr. collins is really great; far greater than anything addison ever did, almost great enough for fielding or for swift himself.
it has been said that no one ever was like him.
but in the first place, he was like him; he is therealive, imperishable, more real than hundreds of prime ministers and archbishops, of metals, semimetals, and distinguished philosophers.
in the second place, it is rash, i think, to conclude that an actual mr. collins was impossible or nonexistent at the end of the eighteenth century.
it is very interesting that we possess, in this same gallery, what may be called a spoiled first draught, or an unsuccessful study of him, in john dashwood.
the formality, the underbreeding, the meanness, are there; but the portrait is only half alive, and is felt to be even a little unnatural.
mr. collins is perfectly natural, and perfectly alive.
in fact, for all the miniature, there is something gigantic in the way in which a certain side, and more than one, of humanity, and especially eighteenthcentury humanity, its philistinism, its wellmeaning but hidebound morality, its formal pettiness, its grovelling respect for rank, its materialism, its selfishness, receives exhibition.
i will not admit that one speech or one action of this inestimable man is incapable of being reconciled with reality, and i should not wonder if many of these words and actions are historically true.
but the greatness of mr. collins could not have been so satisfactorily exhibited if his creatress had not adjusted so artfully to him the figures of mr. bennet and of lady catherine de bourgh.
the latter, like mr. collins himself, has been charged with exaggeration.
there is, perhaps, a very faint shade of colour for the charge; but it seems to me very faint indeed.
even now i do not think that it would be impossible to find persons, especially female persons, not necessarily of noble birth, as overbearing, as selfcentred, as neglectful of good manners, as lady catherine.
a hundred years ago, an earls daughter, the lady powerful (if not exactly bountiful) of an outoftheway country parish, rich, long out of marital authority, and so forth, had opportunities of developing these agreeable characteristics which seldom present themselves now.
as for mr. bennet, miss austen, and mr. darcy, and even miss elizabeth herself, were, i am inclined to think, rather hard on him for the impropriety of his conduct.
his wife was evidently, and must always have been, a quite irreclaimable fool; and unless he had shot her or himself there was no way out of it for a man of sense and spirit but the ironic.
from no other point of view is he open to any reproach, except for an excusable and not unnatural helplessness at the crisis of the elopement, and his utterances are the most acutely delightful in the consciously humorous kindin the kind that we laugh with, not atthat even miss austen has put into the mouth of any of her characters.
it is difficult to know whether he is most agreeable when talking to his wife, or when putting mr. collins through his paces; but the general sense of the world has probably been right in preferring to the first rank his consolation to the former when she maunders over the entail, my dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts.
let us hope for better things.
let us flatter ourselves that i may be the survivor; and his inquiry to his colossal cousin as to the compliments which mr. collins has just related as made by himself to lady catherine, may i ask whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the moment, or are the result of previous study?
these are the things which give miss austens readers the pleasant shocks, the delightful thrills, which are felt by the readers of swift, of fielding, and we may here add, of thackeray, as they are felt by the readers of no other english author of fiction outside of these four.
the goodness of the minor characters in pride and prejudice has been already alluded to, and it makes a detailed dwelling on their beauties difficult in any space, and impossible in this.
mrs. bennet we have glanced at, and it is not easy to say whether she is more exquisitely amusing or more horribly true.
much the same may be said of kitty and lydia; but it is not every author, even of genius, who would have differentiated with such unerring skill the effects of folly and vulgarity of intellect and disposition working upon the common weaknesses of woman at such different ages.
with mary, miss austen has taken rather less pains, though she has been even more unkind to her; not merely in the text, but, as we learn from those interesting traditional appendices which mr. austen leigh has given us, in dooming her privately to marry one of mr. philipss clerks.
the habits of first copying and then retailing moral sentiments, of playing and singing too long in public, are, no doubt, grievous and criminal; but perhaps poor mary was rather the scapegoat of the sins of blue stockings in that fordycebelectured generation.
it is at any rate difficult not to extend to her a share of the respect and affection (affection and respect of a peculiar kind; doubtless), with which one regards mr. collins, when she draws the moral of lydias fall.
i sometimes wish that the exigencies of the story had permitted miss austen to unite these personages, and thus at once achieve a notable mating and soothe poor mrs. bennets anguish over the entail.
the bingleys and the gardiners and the lucases, miss darcy and miss de bourgh, jane, wickham, and the rest, must pass without special comment, further than the remark that charlotte lucas (her egregious papa, though delightful, is just a little on the thither side of the line between comedy and farce) is a wonderfully clever study in drab of one kind, and that wickham (though something of miss austens hesitation of touch in dealing with young men appears) is a not much less notable sketch in drab of another.
only genius could have made charlotte what she is, yet not disagreeable; wickham what he is, without investing him either with a cheap don juanish attractiveness or a disgusting rascality.
but the hero and the heroine are not tints to be dismissed.
darcy has always seemed to me by far the best and most interesting of miss austens heroes; the only possible competitor being henry tilney, whose part is so slight and simple that it hardly enters into comparison.
it has sometimes, i believe, been urged that his pride is unnatural at first in its expression and later in its yielding, while his falling in love at all is not extremely probable.
here again i cannot go with the objectors.
darcys own account of the way in which his pride had been pampered, is perfectly rational and sufficient; and nothing could be, psychologically speaking, a causa verior for its sudden restoration to healthy conditions than the shock of elizabeths scornful refusal acting on a nature ex hypothesi generous.
nothing in even our author is finer and more delicately touched than the change of his demeanour at the sudden meeting in the grounds of pemberley.
had he been a bad prig or a bad coxcomb, he might have been still smarting under his rejection, or suspicious that the girl had come husbandhunting.
his being neither is exactly consistent with the probable feelings of a man spoilt in the common sense, but not really injured in disposition, and thoroughly in love.
as for his being in love, elizabeth has given as just an exposition of the causes of that phenomenon as darcy has of the conditions of his unregenerate state, only she has of course not counted in what was due to her own personal charm.
the secret of that charm many men and not a few women, from miss austen herself downwards, have felt, and like most charms it is a thing rather to be felt than to be explained.
elizabeth of course belongs to the allegro or allegra division of the army of venus.
miss austen was always provokingly chary of description in regard to her beauties; and except the fine eyes, and a hint or two that she had at any rate sometimes a bright complexion, and was not very tall, we hear nothing about her looks.
but her chief difference from other heroines of the lively type seems to lie first in her being distinctly cleveralmost strongminded, in the better sense of that objectionable wordand secondly in her being entirely destitute of illnature for all her propensity to tease and the sharpness of her tongue.
elizabeth can give at least as good as she gets when she is attacked; but she never scratches, and she never attacks first.
some of the merest obsoletenesses of phrase and manner give one or two of her early speeches a slight pertness, but that is nothing, and when she comes to serious business, as in the great proposal scene with darcy (which is, as it should be, the climax of the interest of the book), and in the final ladies battle with lady catherine, she is unexceptionable.
then too she is a perfectly natural girl.
she does not disguise from herself or anybody that she resents darcys first illmannered personality with as personal a feeling.
(by the way, the reproach that the illmanners of this speech are overdone is certainly unjust; for things of the same kind, expressed no doubt less stiltedly but more coarsely, might have been heard in more than one ballroom during this very year from persons who ought to have been no worse bred than darcy.)
and she lets the injury done to jane and the contempt shown to the rest of her family aggravate this resentment in the healthiest way in the world.
still, all this does not explain her charm, which, taking beauty as a common form of all heroines, may perhaps consist in the addition to her playfulness, her wit, her affectionate and natural disposition, of a certain fearlessness very uncommon in heroines of her type and age.
nearly all of them would have been in speechless awe of the magnificent darcy; nearly all of them would have palpitated and fluttered at the idea of proposals, even naughty ones, from the fascinating wickham.
elizabeth, with nothing offensive, nothing viraginous, nothing of the new woman about her, has by nature what the best modern (not new) women have by education and experience, a perfect freedom from the idea that all men may bully her if they choose, and that most will away with her if they can.
though not in the least impudent and mannish grown, she has no mere sensibility, no nasty niceness about her.
the form of passion common and likely to seem natural in miss austens day was so invariably connected with the display of one or the other, or both of these qualities, that she has not made elizabeth outwardly passionate.
but i, at least, have not the slightest doubt that she would have married darcy just as willingly without pemberley as with it, and anybody who can read between lines will not find the lovers conversations in the final chapters so frigid as they might have looked to the della cruscans of their own day, and perhaps do look to the della cruscans of this.
and, after all, what is the good of seeking for the reason of charm?it is there.
there were better sense in the sad mechanic exercise of determining the reason of its absence where it is not.
in the novels of the last hundred years there are vast numbers of young ladies with whom it might be a pleasure to fall in love; there are at least five with whom, as it seems to me, no man of taste and spirit can help doing so.
their names are, in chronological order, elizabeth bennet, diana vernon, argemone lavington, beatrix esmond, and barbara grant.
i should have been most in love with beatrix and argemone; i should, i think, for mere occasional companionship, have preferred diana and barbara.
but to live with and to marry, i do not know that any one of the four can come into competition with elizabeth.
george saintsbury.
illustration: list of illustrations.
page frontispiece iv titlepage v dedication vii heading to preface ix heading to list of illustrations xxv heading to chapter i.
1 he came down to see the place 2 mr. and mrs. bennet 5 i hope mr. bingley will like it 6 im the tallest 9 he rode a black horse 10 when the party entered 12 she is tolerable 15 heading to chapter iv.
18 heading to chapter v. 22 without once opening his lips 24 tailpiece to chapter v. 26 heading to chapter vi.
27 the entreaties of several 31 a note for miss bennet 36 cheerful prognostics 40 the apothecary came 43 covering a screen 45 mrs. bennet and her two youngest girls 53 heading to chapter x.
60 no, no; stay where you are 67 piling up the fire 69 heading to chapter xii.
75 heading to chapter xiii.
78 heading to chapter xiv.
84 protested that he never read novels 87 heading to chapter xv.
89 heading to chapter xvi.
95 the officers of the shire 97 delighted to see their dear friend again 108 heading to chapter xviii.
113 such very superior dancing is not often seen 118 to assure you in the most animated language 132 heading to chapter xx.
139 they entered the breakfastroom 143 heading to chapter xxi.
146 walked back with them 148 heading to chapter xxii.
154 so much love and eloquence 156 protested he must be entirely mistaken 161 whenever she spoke in a low voice 166 heading to chapter xxiv.
168 heading to chapter xxv.
175 offended two or three young ladies 177 will you come and see me?
181 on the stairs 189 at the door 194 in conversation with the ladies 198 lady catherine, said she, you have given me a treasure 200 heading to chapter xxx.
209 he never failed to inform them 211 the gentlemen accompanied him 213 heading to chapter xxxi.
215 heading to chapter xxxii.
221 accompanied by their aunt 225 on looking up 228 heading to chapter xxxiv.
235 hearing herself called 243 heading to chapter xxxvi.
253 meeting accidentally in town 256 his parting obeisance 261 dawson 263 the elevation of his feelings 267 they had forgotten to leave any message 270 how nicely we are crammed in!
272 heading to chapter xl.
278 i am determined never to speak of it again 283 when colonel millers regiment went away 285 tenderly flirting 290 the arrival of the gardiners 294 conjecturing as to the date 301 heading to chapter xliv.
318 to make herself agreeable to all 321 engaged by the river 327 heading to chapter xlvi.
334 i have not an instant to lose 339 the first pleasing earnest of their welcome 345 the post 359 to whom i have related the affair 363 heading to chapter xlix.
368 but perhaps you would like to read it 370 the spiteful old ladies 377 with an affectionate smile 385 i am sure she did not listen 393 mr. darcy with him 404 jane happened to look round 415 mrs. long and her nieces 420 lizzy, my dear, i want to speak to you 422 heading to chapter lvi.
431 after a short survey 434 but now it comes out 442 the efforts of his aunt 448 unable to utter a syllable 457 the obsequious civility 466 heading to chapter lxi.
472 the end 476 illustration: pride and prejudice chapter i. it is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a good fortune must be in want of a wife.
however little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his first entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the minds of the surrounding families, that he is considered as the rightful property of some one or other of their daughters.
my dear mr. bennet, said his lady to him one day, have you heard that netherfield park is let at last?
mr. bennet replied that he had not.
but it is, returned she; for mrs. long has just been here, and she told me all about it.
mr. bennet made no answer.
do not you want to know who has taken it?
cried his wife, impatiently.
you want to tell me, and i have no objection to hearing it.
illustration: he came down to see the place copyright 1894 by george allen.
this was invitation enough.
why, my dear, you must know, mrs. long says that netherfield is taken by a young man of large fortune from the north of england; that he came down on monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so much delighted with it that he agreed with mr. morris immediately; that he is to take possession before michaelmas, and some of his servants are to be in the house by the end of next week.
what is his name?
bingley.
is he married or single?
oh, single, my dear, to be sure!
a single man of large fortune; four or five thousand a year.
what a fine thing for our girls!
how so?
how can it affect them?
my dear mr. bennet, replied his wife, how can you be so tiresome?
you must know that i am thinking of his marrying one of them.
is that his design in settling here?
design?
nonsense, how can you talk so!
but it is very likely that he may fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him as soon as he comes.
i see no occasion for that.
you and the girls may goor you may send them by themselves, which perhaps will be still better; for as you are as handsome as any of them, mr. bingley might like you the best of the party.
my dear, you flatter me.
i certainly have had my share of beauty, but i do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now.
when a woman has five grownup daughters, she ought to give over thinking of her own beauty.
in such cases, a woman has not often much beauty to think of.
but, my dear, you must indeed go and see mr. bingley when he comes into the neighbourhood.
it is more than i engage for, i assure you.
but consider your daughters.
only think what an establishment it would be for one of them.
sir william and lady lucas are determined to go, merely on that account; for in general, you know, they visit no new comers.
indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for us to visit him, if you do not.
you are over scrupulous, surely.
i dare say mr. bingley will be very glad to see you; and i will send a few lines by you to assure him of my hearty consent to his marrying whichever he chooses of the girlsthough i must throw in a good word for my little lizzy.
i desire you will do no such thing.
lizzy is not a bit better than the others: and i am sure she is not half so handsome as jane, nor half so goodhumoured as lydia.
but you are always giving her the preference.
they have none of them much to recommend them, replied he: they are all silly and ignorant like other girls; but lizzy has something more of quickness than her sisters.
mr. bennet, how can you abuse your own children in such a way?
you take delight in vexing me.
you have no compassion on my poor nerves.
you mistake me, my dear.
i have a high respect for your nerves.
they are my old friends.
i have heard you mention them with consideration these twenty years at least.
ah, you do not know what i suffer.
but i hope you will get over it, and live to see many young men of four thousand a year come into the neighbourhood.
it will be no use to us, if twenty such should come, since you will not visit them.
depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty, i will visit them all.
mr. bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour, reserve, and caprice, that the experience of threeandtwenty years had been insufficient to make his wife understand his character.
her mind was less difficult to develope.
she was a woman of mean understanding, little information, and uncertain temper.
when she was discontented, she fancied herself nervous.
the business of her life was to get her daughters married: its solace was visiting and news.
illustration: mr.  mrs. bennet copyright 1894 by george allen.
illustration: i hope mr. bingley will like it copyright 1894 by george allen.
chapter ii.
illustration mr. bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on mr. bingley.
he had always intended to visit him, though to the last always assuring his wife that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit was paid she had no knowledge of it.
it was then disclosed in the following manner.
observing his second daughter employed in trimming a hat, he suddenly addressed her with, i hope mr. bingley will like it, lizzy.
we are not in a way to know what mr. bingley likes, said her mother, resentfully, since we are not to visit.
but you forget, mamma, said elizabeth, that we shall meet him at the assemblies, and that mrs. long has promised to introduce him.
i do not believe mrs. long will do any such thing.
she has two nieces of her own.
she is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and i have no opinion of her.
no more have i, said mr. bennet; and i am glad to find that you do not depend on her serving you.
mrs. bennet deigned not to make any reply; but, unable to contain herself, began scolding one of her daughters.
dont keep coughing so, kitty, for heavens sake!
have a little compassion on my nerves.
you tear them to pieces.
kitty has no discretion in her coughs, said her father; she times them ill. i do not cough for my own amusement, replied kitty, fretfully.
when is your next ball to be, lizzy?
tomorrow fortnight.
ay, so it is, cried her mother, and mrs. long does not come back till the day before; so, it will be impossible for her to introduce him, for she will not know him herself.
then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduce mr. bingley to her.
impossible, mr. bennet, impossible, when i am not acquainted with him myself; how can you be so teasing?
i honour your circumspection.
a fortnights acquaintance is certainly very little.
one cannot know what a man really is by the end of a fortnight.
but if we do not venture, somebody else will; and after all, mrs. long and her nieces must stand their chance; and, therefore, as she will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, i will take it on myself.
the girls stared at their father.
mrs. bennet said only, nonsense, nonsense!
what can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?
cried he.
do you consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid on them, as nonsense?
i cannot quite agree with you there.
what say you, mary?
for you are a young lady of deep reflection, i know, and read great books, and make extracts.
mary wished to say something very sensible, but knew not how.
while mary is adjusting her ideas, he continued, let us return to mr. bingley.
i am sick of mr. bingley, cried his wife.
i am sorry to hear that; but why did you not tell me so before?
if i had known as much this morning, i certainly would not have called on him.
it is very unlucky; but as i have actually paid the visit, we cannot escape the acquaintance now.
the astonishment of the ladies was just what he wishedthat of mrs. bennet perhaps surpassing the rest; though when the first tumult of joy was over, she began to declare that it was what she had expected all the while.
how good it was in you, my dear mr. bennet!
but i knew i should persuade you at last.
i was sure you loved your girls too well to neglect such an acquaintance.
well, how pleased i am!
and it is such a good joke, too, that you should have gone this morning, and never said a word about it till now.
now, kitty, you may cough as much as you choose, said mr. bennet; and, as he spoke, he left the room, fatigued with the raptures of his wife.
what an excellent father you have, girls, said she, when the door was shut.
i do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness; or me either, for that matter.
at our time of life, it is not so pleasant, i can tell you, to be making new acquaintances every day; but for your sakes we would do anything.
lydia, my love, though you are the youngest, i dare say mr. bingley will dance with you at the next ball.
oh, said lydia, stoutly, i am not afraid; for though i am the youngest, im the tallest.
the rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he would return mr. bennets visit, and determining when they should ask him to dinner.
illustration: im the tallest illustration: he rode a black horse  chapter iii.
illustration not all that mrs. bennet, however, with the assistance of her five daughters, could ask on the subject, was sufficient to draw from her husband any satisfactory description of mr. bingley.
they attacked him in various ways, with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, and distant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all; and they were at last obliged to accept the secondhand intelligence of their neighbour, lady lucas.
her report was highly favourable.
sir william had been delighted with him.
he was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely agreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assembly with a large party.
nothing could be more delightful!
to be fond of dancing was a certain step towards falling in love; and very lively hopes of mr. bingleys heart were entertained.
if i can but see one of my daughters happily settled at netherfield, said mrs. bennet to her husband, and all the others equally well married, i shall have nothing to wish for.
in a few days mr. bingley returned mr. bennets visit, and sat about ten minutes with him in his library.
he had entertained hopes of being admitted to a sight of the young ladies, of whose beauty he had heard much; but he saw only the father.
the ladies were somewhat more fortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining, from an upper window, that he wore a blue coat and rode a black horse.
an invitation to dinner was soon afterwards despatched; and already had mrs. bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to her housekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred it all.
mr. bingley was obliged to be in town the following day, and consequently unable to accept the honour of their invitation, etc.
mrs. bennet was quite disconcerted.
she could not imagine what business he could have in town so soon after his arrival in hertfordshire; and she began to fear that he might always be flying about from one place to another, and never settled at netherfield as he ought to be.
lady lucas quieted her fears a little by starting the idea of his illustration: when the party entered copyright 1894 by george allen.
being gone to london only to get a large party for the ball; and a report soon followed that mr. bingley was to bring twelve ladies and seven gentlemen with him to the assembly.
the girls grieved over such a number of ladies; but were comforted the day before the ball by hearing that, instead of twelve, he had brought only six with him from london, his five sisters and a cousin.
and when the party entered the assemblyroom, it consisted of only five altogether: mr. bingley, his two sisters, the husband of the eldest, and another young man.
mr. bingley was goodlooking and gentlemanlike: he had a pleasant countenance, and easy, unaffected manners.
his sisters were fine women, with an air of decided fashion.
his brotherinlaw, mr. hurst, merely looked the gentleman; but his friend mr. darcy soon drew the attention of the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien, and the report, which was in general circulation within five minutes after his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year.
the gentlemen pronounced him to be a fine figure of a man, the ladies declared he was much handsomer than mr. bingley, and he was looked at with great admiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgust which turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to be proud, to be above his company, and above being pleased; and not all his large estate in derbyshire could save him from having a most forbidding, disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be compared with his friend.
mr. bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principal people in the room: he was lively and unreserved, danced every dance, was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of giving one himself at netherfield.
such amiable qualities must speak for themselves.
what a contrast between him and his friend!
mr. darcy danced only once with mrs. hurst and once with miss bingley, declined being introduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening in walking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party.
his character was decided.
he was the proudest, most disagreeable man in the world, and everybody hoped that he would never come there again.
amongst the most violent against him was mrs. bennet, whose dislike of his general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment by his having slighted one of her daughters.
elizabeth bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sit down for two dances; and during part of that time, mr. darcy had been standing near enough for her to overhear a conversation between him and mr. bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes to press his friend to join it.
come, darcy, said he, i must have you dance.
i hate to see you standing about by yourself in this stupid manner.
you had much better dance.
i certainly shall not.
you know how i detest it, unless i am particularly acquainted with my partner.
at such an assembly as this, it would be insupportable.
your sisters are engaged, and there is not another woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me to stand up with.
i would not be so fastidious as you are, cried bingley, for a kingdom!
upon my honour, i never met with so many pleasant girls in my life as i have this evening; and there are several of them, you see, uncommonly pretty.
you are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room, said mr. darcy, looking at the eldest miss bennet.
oh, she is the most beautiful creature i ever beheld!
but there is one of her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very pretty, and i dare say very agreeable.
do let me ask my partner to introduce you.
illustration: she is tolerable copyright 1894 by george allen.
which do you mean?
and turning round, he looked for a moment at elizabeth, till, catching her eye, he withdrew his own, and coldly said, she is tolerable: but not handsome enough to tempt me; and i am in no humour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slighted by other men.
you had better return to your partner and enjoy her smiles, for you are wasting your time with me.
mr. bingley followed his advice.
mr. darcy walked off; and elizabeth remained with no very cordial feelings towards him.
she told the story, however, with great spirit among her friends; for she had a lively, playful disposition, which delighted in anything ridiculous.
the evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family.
mrs. bennet had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the netherfield party.
mr. bingley had danced with her twice, and she had been distinguished by his sisters.
jane was as much gratified by this as her mother could be, though in a quieter way.
elizabeth felt janes pleasure.
mary had heard herself mentioned to miss bingley as the most accomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and catherine and lydia had been fortunate enough to be never without partners, which was all that they had yet learnt to care for at a ball.
they returned, therefore, in good spirits to longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which they were the principal inhabitants.
they found mr. bennet still up.
with a book, he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had a good deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raised such splendid expectations.
he had rather hoped that all his wifes views on the stranger would be disappointed; but he soon found that he had a very different story to hear.
oh, my dear mr. bennet, as she entered the room, we have had a most delightful evening, a most excellent ball.
i wish you had been there.
jane was so admired, nothing could be like it.
everybody said how well she looked; and mr. bingley thought her quite beautiful, and danced with her twice.
only think of that, my dear: he actually danced with her twice; and she was the only creature in the room that he asked a second time.
first of all, he asked miss lucas.
i was so vexed to see him stand up with her; but, however, he did not admire her at all; indeed, nobody can, you know; and he seemed quite struck with jane as she was going down the dance.
so he inquired who she was, and got introduced, and asked her for the two next.
then, the two third he danced with miss king, and the two fourth with maria lucas, and the two fifth with jane again, and the two sixth with lizzy, and the boulanger if he had had any compassion for me, cried her husband impatiently, he would not have danced half so much!
for gods sake, say no more of his partners.
o that he had sprained his ancle in the first dance!
oh, my dear, continued mrs. bennet, i am quite delighted with him.
he is so excessively handsome!
and his sisters are charming women.
i never in my life saw anything more elegant than their dresses.
i dare say the lace upon mrs. hursts gown here she was interrupted again.
mr. bennet protested against any description of finery.
she was therefore obliged to seek another branch of the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit, and some exaggeration, the shocking rudeness of mr. darcy.
but i can assure you, she added, that lizzy does not lose much by not suiting his fancy; for he is a most disagreeable, horrid man, not at all worth pleasing.
so high and so conceited, that there was no enduring him!
he walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so very great!
not handsome enough to dance with!
i wish you had been there, my dear, to have given him one of your setdowns.
i quite detest the man.
illustration chapter iv.
illustration when jane and elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious in her praise of mr. bingley before, expressed to her sister how very much she admired him.
he is just what a youngman ought to be, said she, sensible, goodhumoured, lively; and i never saw such happy manners!
so much ease, with such perfect good breeding!
he is also handsome, replied elizabeth, which a young man ought likewise to be if he possibly can.
his character is thereby complete.
i was very much flattered by his asking me to dance a second time.
i did not expect such a compliment.
did not you?
i did for you.
but that is one great difference between us.
compliments always take you by surprise, and me never.
what could be more natural than his asking you again?
he could not help seeing that you were about five times as pretty as every other woman in the room.
no thanks to his gallantry for that.
well, he certainly is very agreeable, and i give you leave to like him.
you have liked many a stupider person.
dear lizzy!
oh, you are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general.
you never see a fault in anybody.
all the world are good and agreeable in your eyes.
i never heard you speak ill of a human being in my life.
i would wish not to be hasty in censuring anyone; but i always speak what i think.
i know you do: and it is that which makes the wonder.
with your good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense of others!
affectation of candour is common enough; one meets with it everywhere.
but to be candid without ostentation or design,to take the good of everybodys character and make it still better, and say nothing of the bad,belongs to you alone.
and so, you like this mans sisters, too, do you?
their manners are not equal to his.
certainly not, at first; but they are very pleasing women when you converse with them.
miss bingley is to live with her brother, and keep his house; and i am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charming neighbour in her.
elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced: their behaviour at the assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with more quickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister, and with a judgment, too, unassailed by any attention to herself, she was very little disposed to approve them.
they were, in fact, very fine ladies; not deficient in goodhumour when they were pleased, nor in the power of being agreeable where they chose it; but proud and conceited.
they were rather handsome; had been educated in one of the first private seminaries in town; had a fortune of twenty thousand pounds; were in the habit of spending more than they ought, and of associating with people of rank; and were, therefore, in every respect entitled to think well of themselves and meanly of others.
they were of a respectable family in the north of england; a circumstance more deeply impressed on their memories than that their brothers fortune and their own had been acquired by trade.
mr. bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundred thousand pounds from his father, who had intended to purchase an estate, but did not live to do it.
mr. bingley intended it likewise, and sometimes made choice of his county; but, as he was now provided with a good house and the liberty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of those who best knew the easiness of his temper, whether he might not spend the remainder of his days at netherfield, and leave the next generation to purchase.
his sisters were very anxious for his having an estate of his own; but though he was now established only as a tenant, miss bingley was by no means unwilling to preside at his table; nor was mrs. hurst, who had married a man of more fashion than fortune, less disposed to consider his house as her home when it suited her.
mr. bingley had not been of age two years when he was tempted, by an accidental recommendation, to look at netherfield house.
he did look at it, and into it, for half an hour; was pleased with the situation and the principal rooms, satisfied with what the owner said in its praise, and took it immediately.
between him and darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite of a great opposition of character.
bingley was endeared to darcy by the easiness, openness, and ductility of his temper, though no disposition could offer a greater contrast to his own, and though with his own he never appeared dissatisfied.
on the strength of darcys regard, bingley had the firmest reliance, and of his judgment the highest opinion.
in understanding, darcy was the superior.
bingley was by no means deficient; but darcy was clever.
he was at the same time haughty, reserved, and fastidious; and his manners, though well bred, were not inviting.
in that respect his friend had greatly the advantage.
bingley was sure of being liked wherever he appeared; darcy was continually giving offence.
the manner in which they spoke of the meryton assembly was sufficiently characteristic.
bingley had never met with pleasanter people or prettier girls in his life; everybody had been most kind and attentive to him; there had been no formality, no stiffness; he had soon felt acquainted with all the room; and as to miss bennet, he could not conceive an angel more beautiful.
darcy, on the contrary, had seen a collection of people in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, for none of whom he had felt the smallest interest, and from none received either attention or pleasure.
miss bennet he acknowledged to be pretty; but she smiled too much.
mrs. hurst and her sister allowed it to be so; but still they admired her and liked her, and pronounced her to be a sweet girl, and one whom they should not object to know more of.
miss bennet was therefore established as a sweet girl; and their brother felt authorized by such commendation to think of her as he chose.
illustration: copyright 1894 by george allen.
chapter v. illustration within a short walk of longbourn lived a family with whom the bennets were particularly intimate.
sir william lucas had been formerly in trade in meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to the honour of knighthood by an address to the king during his mayoralty.
the distinction had, perhaps, been felt too strongly.
it had given him a disgust to his business and to his residence in a small market town; and, quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a house about a mile from meryton, denominated from that period lucas lodge; where he could think with pleasure of his own importance, and, unshackled by business, occupy himself solely in being civil to all the world.
for, though elated by his rank, it did not render him supercilious; on the contrary, he was all attention to everybody.
by nature inoffensive, friendly, and obliging, his presentation at st. jamess had made him courteous.
lady lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be a valuable neighbour to mrs. bennet.
they had several children.
the eldest of them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twentyseven, was elizabeths intimate friend.
that the miss lucases and the miss bennets should meet to talk over a ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assembly brought the former to longbourn to hear and to communicate.
you began the evening well, charlotte, said mrs. bennet, with civil selfcommand, to miss lucas.
you were mr. bingleys first choice.
yes; but he seemed to like his second better.
oh, you mean jane, i suppose, because he danced with her twice.
to be sure that did seem as if he admired herindeed, i rather believe he didi heard something about itbut i hardly know whatsomething about mr. robinson.
perhaps you mean what i overheard between him and mr. robinson: did not i mention it to you?
mr. robinsons asking him how he liked our meryton assemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great many pretty women in the room, and which he thought the prettiest?
and his answering immediately to the last question, oh, the eldest miss bennet, beyond a doubt: there cannot be two opinions on that point.
upon my word!
well, that was very decided, indeedthat does seem as ifbut, however, it may all come to nothing, you know.
my overhearings were more to the purpose than yours, eliza, said charlotte.
mr. darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend, is he?
poor eliza!
to be only just tolerable.
i beg you will not put it into lizzys head to be vexed by his illtreatment, for he is such a disagreeable man that it would be quite a misfortune to be liked by him.
mrs. long told me last night that he sat close to her for half an hour without once opening his lips.
illustration: without once opening his lips copyright 1894 by george allen.
are you quite sure, maam?
is not there a little mistake?
said jane.
i certainly saw mr. darcy speaking to her.
ay, because she asked him at last how he liked netherfield, and he could not help answering her; but she said he seemed very angry at being spoke to.
miss bingley told me, said jane, that he never speaks much unless among his intimate acquaintance.
with them he is remarkably agreeable.
i do not believe a word of it, my dear.
if he had been so very agreeable, he would have talked to mrs. long.
but i can guess how it was; everybody says that he is eat up with pride, and i dare say he had heard somehow that mrs. long does not keep a carriage, and had to come to the ball in a hack chaise.
i do not mind his not talking to mrs. long, said miss lucas, but i wish he had danced with eliza.
another time, lizzy, said her mother, i would not dance with him, if i were you.
i believe, maam, i may safely promise you never to dance with him.
his pride, said miss lucas, does not offend me so much as pride often does, because there is an excuse for it.
one cannot wonder that so very fine a young man, with family, fortune, everything in his favour, should think highly of himself.
if i may so express it, he has a right to be proud.
that is very true, replied elizabeth, and i could easily forgive his pride, if he had not mortified mine.
pride, observed mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of her reflections, is a very common failing, i believe.
by all that i have ever read, i am convinced that it is very common indeed; that human nature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of us who do not cherish a feeling of selfcomplacency on the score of some quality or other, real or imaginary.
vanity and pride are different things, though the words are often used synonymously.
a person may be proud without being vain.
pride relates more to our opinion of ourselves; vanity to what we would have others think of us.
if i were as rich as mr. darcy, cried a young lucas, who came with his sisters, i should not care how proud i was.
i would keep a pack of foxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine every day.
then you would drink a great deal more than you ought, said mrs. bennet; and if i were to see you at it, i should take away your bottle directly.
the boy protested that she should not; she continued to declare that she would; and the argument ended only with the visit.
illustration illustration chapter vi.
illustration the ladies of longbourn soon waited on those of netherfield.
the visit was returned in due form.
miss bennets pleasing manners grew on the goodwill of mrs. hurst and miss bingley; and though the mother was found to be intolerable, and the younger sisters not worth speaking to, a wish of being better acquainted with them was expressed towards the two eldest.
by jane this attention was received with the greatest pleasure; but elizabeth still saw superciliousness in their treatment of everybody, hardly excepting even her sister, and could not like them; though their kindness to jane, such as it was, had a value, as arising, in all probability, from the influence of their brothers admiration.
it was generally evident, whenever they met, that he did admire her; and to her it was equally evident that jane was yielding to the preference which she had begun to entertain for him from the first, and was in a way to be very much in love; but she considered with pleasure that it was not likely to be discovered by the world in general, since jane united with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and an uniform cheerfulness of manner, which would guard her from the suspicions of the impertinent.
she mentioned this to her friend, miss lucas.
it may, perhaps, be pleasant, replied charlotte, to be able to impose on the public in such a case; but it is sometimes a disadvantage to be so very guarded.
if a woman conceals her affection with the same skill from the object of it, she may lose the opportunity of fixing him; and it will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally in the dark.
there is so much of gratitude or vanity in almost every attachment, that it is not safe to leave any to itself.
we can all begin freelya slight preference is natural enough; but there are very few of us who have heart enough to be really in love without encouragement.
in nine cases out of ten, a woman had better show more affection than she feels.
bingley likes your sister undoubtedly; but he may never do more than like her, if she does not help him on.
but she does help him on, as much as her nature will allow.
if i can perceive her regard for him, he must be a simpleton indeed not to discover it too.
remember, eliza, that he does not know janes disposition as you do.
but if a woman is partial to a man, and does not endeavor to conceal it, he must find it out.
perhaps he must, if he sees enough of her.
but though bingley and jane meet tolerably often, it is never for many hours together; and as they always see each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible that every moment should be employed in conversing together.
jane should therefore make the most of every half hour in which she can command his attention.
when she is secure of him, there will be leisure for falling in love as much as she chooses.
your plan is a good one, replied elizabeth, where nothing is in question but the desire of being well married; and if i were determined to get a rich husband, or any husband, i dare say i should adopt it.
but these are not janes feelings; she is not acting by design.
as yet she cannot even be certain of the degree of her own regard, nor of its reasonableness.
she has known him only a fortnight.
she danced four dances with him at meryton; she saw him one morning at his own house, and has since dined in company with him four times.
this is not quite enough to make her understand his character.
not as you represent it.
had she merely dined with him, she might only have discovered whether he had a good appetite; but you must remember that four evenings have been also spent togetherand four evenings may do a great deal.
yes: these four evenings have enabled them to ascertain that they both like vingtun better than commerce, but with respect to any other leading characteristic, i do not imagine that much has been unfolded.
well, said charlotte, i wish jane success with all my heart; and if she were married to him tomorrow, i should think she had as good a chance of happiness as if she were to be studying his character for a twelvemonth.
happiness in marriage is entirely a matter of chance.
if the dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other, or ever so similar beforehand, it does not advance their felicity in the least.
they always continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards to have their share of vexation; and it is better to know as little as possible of the defects of the person with whom you are to pass your life.
you make me laugh, charlotte; but it is not sound.
you know it is not sound, and that you would never act in this way yourself.
occupied in observing mr. bingleys attention to her sister, elizabeth was far from suspecting that she was herself becoming an object of some interest in the eyes of his friend.
mr. darcy had at first scarcely allowed her to be pretty: he had looked at her without admiration at the ball; and when they next met, he looked at her only to criticise.
but no sooner had he made it clear to himself and his friends that she had hardly a good feature in her face, than he began to find it was rendered uncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of her dark eyes.
to this discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying.
though he had detected with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetry in her form, he was forced to acknowledge her figure to be light and pleasing; and in spite of his asserting that her manners were not those of the fashionable world, he was caught by their easy playfulness.
of this she was perfectly unaware: to her he was only the man who made himself agreeable nowhere, and who had not thought her handsome enough to dance with.
he began to wish to know more of her; and, as a step towards conversing with her himself, attended to her conversation with others.
his doing so drew her notice.
it was at sir william lucass, where a large party were assembled.
what does mr. darcy mean, said she to charlotte, by listening to my conversation with colonel forster?
that is a question which mr. darcy only can answer.
but if he does it any more, i shall certainly let him know that i see what he is about.
he has a very satirical eye, and if i do not begin by being impertinent myself, i shall soon grow afraid of him.
illustration: the entreaties of several copyright 1894 by george allen.
on his approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming to have any intention of speaking, miss lucas defied her friend to mention such a subject to him, which immediately provoking elizabeth to do it, she turned to him and said, did not you think, mr. darcy, that i expressed myself uncommonly well just now, when i was teasing colonel forster to give us a ball at meryton?
with great energy; but it is a subject which always makes a lady energetic.
you are severe on us.
it will be her turn soon to be teased, said miss lucas.
i am going to open the instrument, eliza, and you know what follows.
you are a very strange creature by way of a friend!always wanting me to play and sing before anybody and everybody!
if my vanity had taken a musical turn, you would have been invaluable; but as it is, i would really rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit of hearing the very best performers.
on miss lucass persevering, however, she added, very well; if it must be so, it must.
and gravely glancing at mr. darcy, there is a very fine old saying, which everybody here is of course familiar withkeep your breath to cool your porridge,and i shall keep mine to swell my song.
her performance was pleasing, though by no means capital.
after a song or two, and before she could reply to the entreaties of several that she would sing again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by her sister mary, who having, in consequence of being the only plain one in the family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments, was always impatient for display.
mary had neither genius nor taste; and though vanity had given her application, it had given her likewise a pedantic air and conceited manner, which would have injured a higher degree of excellence than she had reached.
elizabeth, easy and unaffected, had been listened to with much more pleasure, though not playing half so well; and mary, at the end of a long concerto, was glad to purchase praise and gratitude by scotch and irish airs, at the request of her younger sisters, who with some of the lucases, and two or three officers, joined eagerly in dancing at one end of the room.
mr. darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode of passing the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and was too much engrossed by his own thoughts to perceive that sir william lucas was his neighbour, till sir william thus began: what a charming amusement for young people this is, mr. darcy!
there is nothing like dancing, after all.
i consider it as one of the first refinements of polished societies.
certainly, sir; and it has the advantage also of being in vogue amongst the less polished societies of the world: every savage can dance.
sir william only smiled.
your friend performs delightfully, he continued, after a pause, on seeing bingley join the group; and i doubt not that you are an adept in the science yourself, mr. darcy.
you saw me dance at meryton, i believe, sir.
yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight.
do you often dance at st. jamess?
never, sir.
do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?
it is a compliment which i never pay to any place if i can avoid it.
you have a house in town, i conclude?
mr. darcy bowed.
i had once some thoughts of fixing in town myself, for i am fond of superior society; but i did not feel quite certain that the air of london would agree with lady lucas.
he paused in hopes of an answer: but his companion was not disposed to make any; and elizabeth at that instant moving towards them, he was struck with the notion of doing a very gallant thing, and called out to her, my dear miss eliza, why are not you dancing?
mr. darcy, you must allow me to present this young lady to you as a very desirable partner.
you cannot refuse to dance, i am sure, when so much beauty is before you.
and, taking her hand, he would have given it to mr. darcy, who, though extremely surprised, was not unwilling to receive it, when she instantly drew back, and said with some discomposure to sir william, indeed, sir, i have not the least intention of dancing.
i entreat you not to suppose that i moved this way in order to beg for a partner.
mr. darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be allowed the honour of her hand, but in vain.
elizabeth was determined; nor did sir william at all shake her purpose by his attempt at persuasion.
you excel so much in the dance, miss eliza, that it is cruel to deny me the happiness of seeing you; and though this gentleman dislikes the amusement in general, he can have no objection, i am sure, to oblige us for one half hour.
mr. darcy is all politeness, said elizabeth, smiling.
he is, indeed: but considering the inducement, my dear miss eliza, we cannot wonder at his complaisance; for who would object to such a partner?
elizabeth looked archly, and turned away.
her resistance had not injured her with the gentleman, and he was thinking of her with some complacency, when thus accosted by miss bingley, i can guess the subject of your reverie.
i should imagine not.
you are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many evenings in this manner,in such society; and, indeed, i am quite of your opinion.
i was never more annoyed!
the insipidity, and yet the noisethe nothingness, and yet the selfimportance, of all these people!
what would i give to hear your strictures on them!
your conjecture is totally wrong, i assure you.
my mind was more agreeably engaged.
i have been meditating on the very great pleasure which a pair of fine eyes in the face of a pretty woman can bestow.
miss bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face, and desired he would tell her what lady had the credit of inspiring such reflections.
mr. darcy replied, with great intrepidity, miss elizabeth bennet.
miss elizabeth bennet!
repeated miss bingley.
i am all astonishment.
how long has she been such a favourite?
and pray when am i to wish you joy?
that is exactly the question which i expected you to ask.
a ladys imagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to love, from love to matrimony, in a moment.
i knew you would be wishing me joy.
nay, if you are so serious about it, i shall consider the matter as absolutely settled.
you will have a charming motherinlaw, indeed, and of course she will be always at pemberley with you.
he listened to her with perfect indifference, while she chose to entertain herself in this manner; and as his composure convinced her that all was safe, her wit flowed along.
illustration: a note for miss bennet copyright 1894 by george allen.
chapter vii.
illustration mr. bennets property consisted almost entirely in an estate of two thousand a year, which, unfortunately for his daughters, was entailed, in default of heirs male, on a distant relation; and their mothers fortune, though ample for her situation in life, could but ill supply the deficiency of his.
her father had been an attorney in meryton, and had left her four thousand pounds.
she had a sister married to a mr. philips, who had been a clerk to their father and succeeded him in the business, and a brother settled in london in a respectable line of trade.
the village of longbourn was only one mile from meryton; a most convenient distance for the young ladies, who were usually tempted thither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt, and to a milliners shop just over the way.
the two youngest of the family, catherine and lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions: their minds were more vacant than their sisters, and when nothing better offered, a walk to meryton was necessary to amuse their morning hours and furnish conversation for the evening; and, however bare of news the country in general might be, they always contrived to learn some from their aunt.
at present, indeed, they were well supplied both with news and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in the neighbourhood; it was to remain the whole winter, and meryton was the headquarters.
their visits to mrs. philips were now productive of the most interesting intelligence.
every day added something to their knowledge of the officers names and connections.
their lodgings were not long a secret, and at length they began to know the officers themselves.
mr. philips visited them all, and this opened to his nieces a source of felicity unknown before.
they could talk of nothing but officers; and mr. bingleys large fortune, the mention of which gave animation to their mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed to the regimentals of an ensign.
after listening one morning to their effusions on this subject, mr. bennet coolly observed, from all that i can collect by your manner of talking, you must be two of the silliest girls in the country.
i have suspected it some time, but i am now convinced.
catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but lydia, with perfect indifference, continued to express her admiration of captain carter, and her hope of seeing him in the course of the day, as he was going the next morning to london.
i am astonished, my dear, said mrs. bennet, that you should be so ready to think your own children silly.
if i wished to think slightingly of anybodys children, it should not be of my own, however.
if my children are silly, i must hope to be always sensible of it.
yes; but as it happens, they are all of them very clever.
this is the only point, i flatter myself, on which we do not agree.
i had hoped that our sentiments coincided in every particular, but i must so far differ from you as to think our two youngest daughters uncommonly foolish.
my dear mr. bennet, you must not expect such girls to have the sense of their father and mother.
when they get to our age, i dare say they will not think about officers any more than we do.
i remember the time when i liked a red coat myself very welland, indeed, so i do still at my heart; and if a smart young colonel, with five or six thousand a year, should want one of my girls, i shall not say nay to him; and i thought colonel forster looked very becoming the other night at sir williams in his regimentals.
mamma, cried lydia, my aunt says that colonel forster and captain carter do not go so often to miss watsons as they did when they first came; she sees them now very often standing in clarkes library.
mrs. bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman with a note for miss bennet; it came from netherfield, and the servant waited for an answer.
mrs. bennets eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she was eagerly calling out, while her daughter read, well, jane, who is it from?
what is it about?
what does he say?
well, jane, make haste and tell us; make haste, my love.
it is from miss bingley, said jane, and then read it aloud.
nind my dear friend,  if you are not so compassionate as to dine today with louisa and me, we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our lives; for a whole days ttette between two women can never end without a quarrel.
come as soon as you can on the receipt of this.
my brother and the gentlemen are to dine with the officers.
yours ever, caroline bingley.
with the officers!
cried lydia: i wonder my aunt did not tell us of that.
dining out, said mrs. bennet; that is very unlucky.
can i have the carriage?
said jane.
no, my dear, you had better go on horseback, because it seems likely to rain; and then you must stay all night.
that would be a good scheme, said elizabeth, if you were sure that they would not offer to send her home.
oh, but the gentlemen will have mr. bingleys chaise to go to meryton; and the hursts have no horses to theirs.
i had much rather go in the coach.
but, my dear, your father cannot spare the horses, i am sure.
they are wanted in the farm, mr. bennet, are not they?
illustration: cheerful prognostics they are wanted in the farm much oftener than i can get them.
but if you have got them today, said elizabeth, my mothers purpose will be answered.
she did at last extort from her father an acknowledgment that the horses were engaged; jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback, and her mother attended her to the door with many cheerful prognostics of a bad day.
her hopes were answered; jane had not been gone long before it rained hard.
her sisters were uneasy for her, but her mother was delighted.
the rain continued the whole evening without intermission; jane certainly could not come back.
this was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!
said mrs. bennet, more than once, as if the credit of making it rain were all her own.
till the next morning, however, she was not aware of all the felicity of her contrivance.
breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from netherfield brought the following note for elizabeth:  nind my dearest lizzie,  i find myself very unwell this morning, which, i suppose, is to be imputed to my getting wet through yesterday.
my kind friends will not hear of my returning home till i am better.
they insist also on my seeing mr. jonestherefore do not be alarmed if you should hear of his having been to meand, excepting a sore throat and a headache, there is not much the matter with me.
yours, etc.
well, my dear, said mr. bennet, when elizabeth had read the note aloud, if your daughter should have a dangerous fit of illnessif she should dieit would be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit of mr. bingley, and under your orders.
oh, i am not at all afraid of her dying.
people do not die of little trifling colds.
she will be taken good care of.
as long as she stays there, it is all very well.
i would go and see her if i could have the carriage.
elizabeth, feeling really anxious, determined to go to her, though the carriage was not to be had: and as she was no horsewoman, walking was her only alternative.
she declared her resolution.
how can you be so silly, cried her mother, as to think of such a thing, in all this dirt!
you will not be fit to be seen when you get there.
i shall be very fit to see janewhich is all i want.
is this a hint to me, lizzy, said her father, to send for the horses?
no, indeed.
i do not wish to avoid the walk.
the distance is nothing, when one has a motive; only three miles.
i shall be back by dinner.
i admire the activity of your benevolence, observed mary, but every impulse of feeling should be guided by reason; and, in my opinion, exertion should always be in proportion to what is required.
we will go as far as meryton with you, said catherine and lydia.
elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young ladies set off together.
if we make haste, said lydia, as they walked along, perhaps we may see something of captain carter, before he goes.
in meryton they parted: the two youngest repaired to the lodgings of one of the officers wives, and elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossing field after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springing over puddles, with impatient activity, and finding herself at last within view of the house, with weary ancles, dirty stockings, and a face glowing with the warmth of exercise.
she was shown into the breakfast parlour, where all but jane were assembled, and where her appearance created a great deal of surprise.
that she should have walked three miles so early in the day in such dirty weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to mrs. hurst and miss bingley; and elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt for it.
she was received, however, very politely by them; and in their brothers manners there was something better than politenessthere was goodhumour and kindness.
mr. darcy said very little, and mr. hurst nothing at all.
the former was divided between admiration of the brilliancy which exercise had given to her complexion and doubt as to the occasions justifying her coming so far alone.
the latter was thinking only of his breakfast.
her inquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered.
miss bennet had slept ill, and though up, was very feverish, and not well enough to leave her room.
elizabeth was glad to be taken to her immediately; and jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of giving alarm or inconvenience, from expressing in her note how much she longed for such a visit, was delighted at her entrance.
she was not equal, however, to much conversation; and when miss bingley left them together, could attempt little beside expressions of gratitude for the extraordinary kindness she was treated with.
elizabeth silently attended her.
when breakfast was over, they were joined by the sisters; and elizabeth began to like them herself, when she saw how much affection and solicitude they showed for jane.
the apothecary came; and having examined his patient, said, as might be supposed, that she had caught a violent cold, and that they must endeavour to get the better of it; advised her to return to bed, and promised her some draughts.
the advice was followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her head ached acutely.
elizabeth did not quit her room for a moment, nor were the other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they had in fact nothing to do elsewhere.
when the clock struck three, elizabeth felt that she must go, and very unwillingly said so.
miss bingley offered her the carriage, and she only wanted a little pressing to accept it, when jane testified such concern at parting with her that miss bingley was obliged to convert the offer of the chaise into an invitation to remain at netherfield for the present.
elizabeth most thankfully consented, and a servant was despatched to longbourn, to acquaint the family with her stay, and bring back a supply of clothes.
illustration: the apothecary came  illustration: covering a screen  chapter viii.
illustration at five oclock the two ladies retired to dress, and at halfpast six elizabeth was summoned to dinner.
to the civil inquiries which then poured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing the much superior solicitude of mr. bingley, she could not make a very favourable answer.
jane was by no means better.
the sisters, on hearing this, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, how shocking it was to have a bad cold, and how excessively they disliked being ill themselves; and then thought no more of the matter: and their indifference towards jane, when not immediately before them, restored elizabeth to the enjoyment of all her original dislike.
their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she could regard with any complacency.
his anxiety for jane was evident, and his attentions to herself most pleasing; and they prevented her feeling herself so much an intruder as she believed she was considered by the others.
she had very little notice from any but him.
miss bingley was engrossed by mr. darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for mr. hurst, by whom elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only to eat, drink, and play at cards, who, when he found her prefer a plain dish to a ragout, had nothing to say to her.
when dinner was over, she returned directly to jane, and miss bingley began abusing her as soon as she was out of the room.
her manners were pronounced to be very bad indeed,a mixture of pride and impertinence: she had no conversation, no style, no taste, no beauty.
mrs. hurst thought the same, and added, she has nothing, in short, to recommend her, but being an excellent walker.
i shall never forget her appearance this morning.
she really looked almost wild.
she did indeed, louisa.
i could hardly keep my countenance.
very nonsensical to come at all!
why must she be scampering about the country, because her sister had a cold?
her hair so untidy, so blowzy!
yes, and her petticoat; i hope you saw her petticoat, six inches deep in mud, i am absolutely certain, and the gown which had been let down to hide it not doing its office.
your picture may be very exact, louisa, said bingley; but this was all lost upon me.
i thought miss elizabeth bennet looked remarkably well when she came into the room this morning.
her dirty petticoat quite escaped my notice.
you observed it, mr. darcy, i am sure, said miss bingley; and i am inclined to think that you would not wish to see your sister make such an exhibition.
certainly not.
to walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or whatever it is, above her ancles in dirt, and alone, quite alone!
what could she mean by it?
it seems to me to show an abominable sort of conceited independence, a most countrytown indifference to decorum.
it shows an affection for her sister that is very pleasing, said bingley.
i am afraid, mr. darcy, observed miss bingley, in a half whisper, that this adventure has rather affected your admiration of her fine eyes.
not at all, he replied: they were brightened by the exercise.
a short pause followed this speech, and mrs. hurst began again, i have an excessive regard for jane bennet,she is really a very sweet girl,and i wish with all my heart she were well settled.
but with such a father and mother, and such low connections, i am afraid there is no chance of it.
i think i have heard you say that their uncle is an attorney in meryton?
yes; and they have another, who lives somewhere near cheapside.
that is capital, added her sister; and they both laughed heartily.
if they had uncles enough to fill all cheapside, cried bingley, it would not make them one jot less agreeable.
but it must very materially lessen their chance of marrying men of any consideration in the world, replied darcy.
to this speech bingley made no answer; but his sisters gave it their hearty assent, and indulged their mirth for some time at the expense of their dear friends vulgar relations.
with a renewal of tenderness, however, they repaired to her room on leaving the diningparlour, and sat with her till summoned to coffee.
she was still very poorly, and elizabeth would not quit her at all, till late in the evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her asleep, and when it appeared to her rather right than pleasant that she should go down stairs herself.
on entering the drawingroom, she found the whole party at loo, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting them to be playing high, she declined it, and making her sister the excuse, said she would amuse herself, for the short time she could stay below, with a book.
mr. hurst looked at her with astonishment.
do you prefer reading to cards?
said he; that is rather singular.
miss eliza bennet, said miss bingley, despises cards.
she is a great reader, and has no pleasure in anything else.
i deserve neither such praise nor such censure, cried elizabeth; i am not a great reader, and i have pleasure in many things.
in nursing your sister i am sure you have pleasure, said bingley; and i hope it will soon be increased by seeing her quite well.
elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards a table where a few books were lying.
he immediately offered to fetch her others; all that his library afforded.
and i wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my own credit; but i am an idle fellow; and though i have not many, i have more than i ever looked into.
elizabeth assured him that she could suit herself perfectly with those in the room.
i am astonished, said miss bingley, that my father should have left so small a collection of books.
what a delightful library you have at pemberley, mr. darcy!
it ought to be good, he replied: it has been the work of many generations.
and then you have added so much to it yourselfyou are always buying books.
i cannot comprehend the neglect of a family library in such days as these.
neglect!
i am sure you neglect nothing that can add to the beauties of that noble place.
charles, when you build your house, i wish it may be half as delightful as pemberley.
i wish it may.
but i would really advise you to make your purchase in that neighbourhood, and take pemberley for a kind of model.
there is not a finer county in england than derbyshire.
with all my heart: i will buy pemberley itself, if darcy will sell it.
i am talking of possibilities, charles.
upon my word, caroline, i should think it more possible to get pemberley by purchase than by imitation.
elizabeth was so much caught by what passed, as to leave her very little attention for her book; and, soon laying it wholly aside, she drew near the cardtable, and stationed herself between mr. bingley and his eldest sister, to observe the game.
is miss darcy much grown since the spring?
said miss bingley: will she be as tall as i am?
i think she will.
she is now about miss elizabeth bennets height, or rather taller.
how i long to see her again!
i never met with anybody who delighted me so much.
such a countenance, such manners, and so extremely accomplished for her age!
her performance on the pianoforte is exquisite.
it is amazing to me, said bingley, how young ladies can have patience to be so very accomplished as they all are.
all young ladies accomplished!
my dear charles, what do you mean?
yes, all of them, i think.
they all paint tables, cover screens, and net purses.
i scarcely know any one who cannot do all this; and i am sure i never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without being informed that she was very accomplished.
your list of the common extent of accomplishments, said darcy, has too much truth.
the word is applied to many a woman who deserves it no otherwise than by netting a purse or covering a screen; but i am very far from agreeing with you in your estimation of ladies in general.
i cannot boast of knowing more than halfadozen in the whole range of my acquaintance that are really accomplished.
nor i, i am sure, said miss bingley.
then, observed elizabeth, you must comprehend a great deal in your idea of an accomplished woman.
yes; i do comprehend a great deal in it.
oh, certainly, cried his faithful assistant, no one can be really esteemed accomplished who does not greatly surpass what is usually met with.
a woman must have a thorough knowledge of music, singing, drawing, dancing, and the modern languages, to deserve the word; and, besides all this, she must possess a certain something in her air and manner of walking, the tone of her voice, her address and expressions, or the word will be but half deserved.
all this she must possess, added darcy; and to all she must yet add something more substantial in the improvement of her mind by extensive reading.
i am no longer surprised at your knowing only six accomplished women.
i rather wonder now at your knowing any.
are you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt the possibility of all this?
i never saw such a woman.
i never saw such capacity, and taste, and application, and elegance, as you describe, united.
mrs. hurst and miss bingley both cried out against the injustice of her implied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew many women who answered this description, when mr. hurst called them to order, with bitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward.
as all conversation was thereby at an end, elizabeth soon afterwards left the room.
eliza bennet, said miss bingley, when the door was closed on her, is one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to the other sex by undervaluing their own; and with many men, i daresay, it succeeds; but, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art.
undoubtedly, replied darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly addressed, there is meanness in all the arts which ladies sometimes condescend to employ for captivation.
whatever bears affinity to cunning is despicable.
miss bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to continue the subject.
elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, and that she could not leave her.
bingley urged mr. joness being sent for immediately; while his sisters, convinced that no country advice could be of any service, recommended an express to town for one of the most eminent physicians.
this she would not hear of; but she was not so unwilling to comply with their brothers proposal; and it was settled that mr. jones should be sent for early in the morning, if miss bennet were not decidedly better.
bingley was quite uncomfortable; his sisters declared that they were miserable.
they solaced their wretchedness, however, by duets after supper; while he could find no better relief to his feelings than by giving his housekeeper directions that every possible attention might be paid to the sick lady and her sister.
illustration: mrs bennet and her two youngest girls copyright 1894 by george allen.
chapter ix.
illustration elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sisters room, and in the morning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to the inquiries which she very early received from mr. bingley by a housemaid, and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on his sisters.
in spite of this amendment, however, she requested to have a note sent to longbourn, desiring her mother to visit jane, and form her own judgment of her situation.
the note was immediately despatched, and its contents as quickly complied with.
mrs. bennet, accompanied by her two youngest girls, reached netherfield soon after the family breakfast.
had she found jane in any apparent danger, mrs. bennet would have been very miserable; but being satisfied on seeing her that her illness was not alarming, she had no wish of her recovering immediately, as her restoration to health would probably remove her from netherfield.
she would not listen, therefore, to her daughters proposal of being carried home; neither did the apothecary, who arrived about the same time, think it at all advisable.
after sitting a little while with jane, on miss bingleys appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughters all attended her into the breakfast parlour.
bingley met them with hopes that mrs. bennet had not found miss bennet worse than she expected.
indeed i have, sir, was her answer.
she is a great deal too ill to be moved.
mr. jones says we must not think of moving her.
we must trespass a little longer on your kindness.
removed!
cried bingley.
it must not be thought of.
my sister, i am sure, will not hear of her removal.
you may depend upon it, madam, said miss bingley, with cold civility, that miss bennet shall receive every possible attention while she remains with us.
mrs. bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments.
i am sure, she added, if it was not for such good friends, i do not know what would become of her, for she is very ill indeed, and suffers a vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which is always the way with her, for she has, without exception, the sweetest temper i ever met with.
i often tell my other girls they are nothing to her.
you have a sweet room here, mr. bingley, and a charming prospect over that gravel walk.
i do not know a place in the country that is equal to netherfield.
you will not think of quitting it in a hurry, i hope, though you have but a short lease.
whatever i do is done in a hurry, replied he; and therefore if i should resolve to quit netherfield, i should probably be off in five minutes.
at present, however, i consider myself as quite fixed here.
that is exactly what i should have supposed of you, said elizabeth.
you begin to comprehend me, do you?
cried he, turning towards her.
oh yesi understand you perfectly.
i wish i might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily seen through, i am afraid, is pitiful.
that is as it happens.
it does not necessarily follow that a deep, intricate character is more or less estimable than such a one as yours.
lizzy, cried her mother, remember where you are, and do not run on in the wild manner that you are suffered to do at home.
i did not know before, continued bingley, immediately, that you were a studier of character.
it must be an amusing study.
yes; but intricate characters are the most amusing.
they have at least that advantage.
the country, said darcy, can in general supply but few subjects for such a study.
in a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined and unvarying society.
but people themselves alter so much, that there is something new to be observed in them for ever.
yes, indeed, cried mrs. bennet, offended by his manner of mentioning a country neighbourhood.
i assure you there is quite as much of that going on in the country as in town.
everybody was surprised; and darcy, after looking at her for a moment, turned silently away.
mrs. bennet, who fancied she had gained a complete victory over him, continued her triumph, i cannot see that london has any great advantage over the country, for my part, except the shops and public places.
the country is a vast deal pleasanter, is not it, mr. bingley?
when i am in the country, he replied, i never wish to leave it; and when i am in town, it is pretty much the same.
they have each their advantages, and i can be equally happy in either.
ay, that is because you have the right disposition.
but that gentleman, looking at darcy, seemed to think the country was nothing at all.
indeed, mamma, you are mistaken, said elizabeth, blushing for her mother.
you quite mistook mr. darcy.
he only meant that there was not such a variety of people to be met with in the country as in town, which you must acknowledge to be true.
certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meeting with many people in this neighbourhood, i believe there are few neighbourhoods larger.
i know we dine with fourandtwenty families.
nothing but concern for elizabeth could enable bingley to keep his countenance.
his sister was less delicate, and directed her eye towards mr. darcy with a very expressive smile.
elizabeth, for the sake of saying something that might turn her mothers thoughts, now asked her if charlotte lucas had been at longbourn since her coming away.
yes, she called yesterday with her father.
what an agreeable man sir william is, mr. bingleyis not he?
so much the man of fashion!
so genteel and so easy!
he has always something to say to everybody.
that is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy themselves very important and never open their mouths quite mistake the matter.
did charlotte dine with you?
no, she would go home.
i fancy she was wanted about the mincepies.
for my part, mr. bingley, i always keep servants that can do their own work; my daughters are brought up differently.
but everybody is to judge for themselves, and the lucases are a very good sort of girls, i assure you.
it is a pity they are not handsome!
not that i think charlotte so very plain; but then she is our particular friend.
she seems a very pleasant young woman, said bingley.
oh dear, yes; but you must own she is very plain.
lady lucas herself has often said so, and envied me janes beauty.
i do not like to boast of my own child; but to be sure, janeone does not often see anybody better looking.
it is what everybody says.
i do not trust my own partiality.
when she was only fifteen there was a gentleman at my brother gardiners in town so much in love with her, that my sisterinlaw was sure he would make her an offer before we came away.
but, however, he did not.
perhaps he thought her too young.
however, he wrote some verses on her, and very pretty they were.
and so ended his affection, said elizabeth, impatiently.
there has been many a one, i fancy, overcome in the same way.
i wonder who first discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!
i have been used to consider poetry as the food of love, said darcy.
of a fine, stout, healthy love it may.
everything nourishes what is strong already.
but if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, i am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away.
darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made elizabeth tremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again.
she longed to speak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a short silence mrs. bennet began repeating her thanks to mr. bingley for his kindness to jane, with an apology for troubling him also with lizzy.
mr. bingley was unaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced his younger sister to be civil also, and say what the occasion required.
she performed her part, indeed, without much graciousness, but mrs. bennet was satisfied, and soon afterwards ordered her carriage.
upon this signal, the youngest of her daughters put herself forward.
the two girls had been whispering to each other during the whole visit; and the result of it was, that the youngest should tax mr. bingley with having promised on his first coming into the country to give a ball at netherfield.
lydia was a stout, wellgrown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion and goodhumoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose affection had brought her into public at an early age.
she had high animal spirits, and a sort of natural selfconsequence, which the attentions of the officers, to whom her uncles good dinners and her own easy manners recommended her, had increased into assurance.
she was very equal, therefore, to address mr. bingley on the subject of the ball, and abruptly reminded him of his promise; adding, that it would be the most shameful thing in the world if he did not keep it.
his answer to this sudden attack was delightful to her mothers ear.
i am perfectly ready, i assure you, to keep my engagement; and, when your sister is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the very day of the ball.
but you would not wish to be dancing while she is ill?
lydia declared herself satisfied.
oh yesit would be much better to wait till jane was well; and by that time, most likely, captain carter would be at meryton again.
and when you have given your ball, she added, i shall insist on their giving one also.
i shall tell colonel forster it will be quite a shame if he does not.
mrs. bennet and her daughters then departed, and elizabeth returned instantly to jane, leaving her own and her relations behaviour to the remarks of the two ladies and mr. darcy; the latter of whom, however, could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of her, in spite of all miss bingleys witticisms on fine eyes.
illustration chapter x. illustration the day passed much as the day before had done.
mrs. hurst and miss bingley had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid, who continued, though slowly, to mend; and, in the evening, elizabeth joined their party in the drawingroom.
the loo table, however, did not appear.
mr. darcy was writing, and miss bingley, seated near him, was watching the progress of his letter, and repeatedly calling off his attention by messages to his sister.
mr. hurst and mr. bingley were at piquet, and mrs. hurst was observing their game.
elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused in attending to what passed between darcy and his companion.
the perpetual commendations of the lady either on his handwriting, or on the evenness of his lines, or on the length of his letter, with the perfect unconcern with which her praises were received, formed a curious dialogue, and was exactly in unison with her opinion of each.
how delighted miss darcy will be to receive such a letter!
he made no answer.
you write uncommonly fast.
you are mistaken.
i write rather slowly.
how many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of a year!
letters of business, too!
how odious i should think them!
it is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of to yours.
pray tell your sister that i long to see her.
i have already told her so once, by your desire.
i am afraid you do not like your pen.
let me mend it for you.
i mend pens remarkably well.
thank youbut i always mend my own.
how can you contrive to write so even?
he was silent.
tell your sister i am delighted to hear of her improvement on the harp, and pray let her know that i am quite in raptures with her beautiful little design for a table, and i think it infinitely superior to miss grantleys.
will you give me leave to defer your raptures till i write again?
at present i have not room to do them justice.
oh, it is of no consequence.
i shall see her in january.
but do you always write such charming long letters to her, mr. darcy?
they are generally long; but whether always charming, it is not for me to determine.
it is a rule with me, that a person who can write a long letter with ease cannot write ill. that will not do for a compliment to darcy, caroline, cried her brother, because he does not write with ease.
he studies too much for words of four syllables.
do not you, darcy?
my style of writing is very different from yours.
oh, cried miss bingley, charles writes in the most careless way imaginable.
he leaves out half his words, and blots the rest.
my ideas flow so rapidly that i have not time to express them; by which means my letters sometimes convey no ideas at all to my correspondents.
your humility, mr. bingley, said elizabeth, must disarm reproof.
nothing is more deceitful, said darcy, than the appearance of humility.
it is often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes an indirect boast.
and which of the two do you call my little recent piece of modesty?
the indirect boast; for you are really proud of your defects in writing, because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity of thought and carelessness of execution, which, if not estimable, you think at least highly interesting.
the power of doing anything with quickness is always much prized by the possessor, and often without any attention to the imperfection of the performance.
when you told mrs. bennet this morning, that if you ever resolved on quitting netherfield you should be gone in five minutes, you meant it to be a sort of panegyric, of compliment to yourself; and yet what is there so very laudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary business undone, and can be of no real advantage to yourself or anyone else?
nay, cried bingley, this is too much, to remember at night all the foolish things that were said in the morning.
and yet, upon my honour, i believed what i said of myself to be true, and i believe it at this moment.
at least, therefore, i did not assume the character of needless precipitance merely to show off before the ladies.
i daresay you believed it; but i am by no means convinced that you would be gone with such celerity.
your conduct would be quite as dependent on chance as that of any man i know; and if, as you were mounting your horse, a friend were to say, bingley, you had better stay till next week, you would probably do ityou would probably not goand, at another word, might stay a month.
you have only proved by this, cried elizabeth, that mr. bingley did not do justice to his own disposition.
you have shown him off now much more than he did himself.
i am exceedingly gratified, said bingley, by your converting what my friend says into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper.
but i am afraid you are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no means intend; for he would certainly think the better of me if, under such a circumstance, i were to give a flat denial, and ride off as fast as i could.
would mr. darcy then consider the rashness of your original intention as atoned for by your obstinacy in adhering to it?
upon my word, i cannot exactly explain the matterdarcy must speak for himself.
you expect me to account for opinions which you choose to call mine, but which i have never acknowledged.
allowing the case, however, to stand according to your representation, you must remember, miss bennet, that the friend who is supposed to desire his return to the house, and the delay of his plan, has merely desired it, asked it without offering one argument in favour of its propriety.
to yield readilyeasilyto the persuasion of a friend is no merit with you.
to yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding of either.
you appear to me, mr. darcy, to allow nothing for the influence of friendship and affection.
a regard for the requester would often make one readily yield to a request, without waiting for arguments to reason one into it.
i am not particularly speaking of such a case as you have supposed about mr. bingley.
we may as well wait, perhaps, till the circumstance occurs, before we discuss the discretion of his behaviour thereupon.
but in general and ordinary cases, between friend and friend, where one of them is desired by the other to change a resolution of no very great moment, should you think ill of that person for complying with the desire, without waiting to be argued into it?
will it not be advisable, before we proceed on this subject, to arrange with rather more precision the degree of importance which is to appertain to this request, as well as the degree of intimacy subsisting between the parties?
by all means, cried bingley; let us hear all the particulars, not forgetting their comparative height and size, for that will have more weight in the argument, miss bennet, than you may be aware of.
i assure you that if darcy were not such a great tall fellow, in comparison with myself, i should not pay him half so much deference.
i declare i do not know a more awful object than darcy on particular occasions, and in particular places; at his own house especially, and of a sunday evening, when he has nothing to do.
mr. darcy smiled; but elizabeth thought she could perceive that he was rather offended, and therefore checked her laugh.
miss bingley warmly resented the indignity he had received, in an expostulation with her brother for talking such nonsense.
i see your design, bingley, said his friend.
you dislike an argument, and want to silence this.
perhaps i do.
arguments are too much like disputes.
if you and miss bennet will defer yours till i am out of the room, i shall be very thankful; and then you may say whatever you like of me.
what you ask, said elizabeth, is no sacrifice on my side; and mr. darcy had much better finish his letter.
mr. darcy took her advice, and did finish his letter.
when that business was over, he applied to miss bingley and elizabeth for the indulgence of some music.
miss bingley moved with alacrity to the pianoforte, and after a polite request that elizabeth would lead the way, which the other as politely and more earnestly negatived, she seated herself.
mrs. hurst sang with her sister; and while they were thus employed, elizabeth could not help observing, as she turned over some musicbooks that lay on the instrument, how frequently mr. darcys eyes were fixed on her.
she hardly knew how to suppose that she could be an object of admiration to so great a man, and yet that he should look at her because he disliked her was still more strange.
she could only imagine, however, at last, that she drew his notice because there was something about her more wrong and reprehensible, according to his ideas of right, than in any other person present.
the supposition did not pain her.
she liked him too little to care for his approbation.
after playing some italian songs, miss bingley varied the charm by a lively scotch air; and soon afterwards mr. darcy, drawing near elizabeth, said to her, do you not feel a great inclination, miss bennet, to seize such an opportunity of dancing a reel?
she smiled, but made no answer.
he repeated the question, with some surprise at her silence.
oh, said she, i heard you before; but i could not immediately determine what to say in reply.
you wanted me, i know, to say yes, that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste; but i always delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating a person of their premeditated contempt.
i have, therefore, made up my mind to tell you that i do not want to dance a reel at all; and now despise me if you dare.
indeed i do not dare.
elizabeth, having rather expected to affront him, was amazed at his gallantry; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in her manner which made it difficult for her to affront anybody, and darcy had never been so bewitched by any woman as he was by her.
he really believed that, were it not for the inferiority of her connections, he should be in some danger.
miss bingley saw, or suspected, enough to be jealous; and her great anxiety for the recovery of her dear friend jane received some assistance from her desire of getting rid of elizabeth.
she often tried to provoke darcy into disliking her guest, by talking of their supposed marriage, and planning his happiness in such an alliance.
i hope, said she, as they were walking together in the shrubbery the next day, you will give your motherinlaw a few hints, when this desirable event takes place, as to the advantage of holding her tongue; and if you can compass it, to cure the younger girls of running after the officers.
and, if i may mention so delicate a subject, endeavour to check that little something, bordering on conceit and impertinence, which your lady possesses.
illustration: no, no; stay where you are copyright 1894 by george allen.
have you anything else to propose for my domestic felicity?
oh yes.
do let the portraits of your uncle and aunt philips be placed in the gallery at pemberley.
put them next to your greatuncle the judge.
they are in the same profession, you know, only in different lines.
as for your elizabeths picture, you must not attempt to have it taken, for what painter could do justice to those beautiful eyes?
it would not be easy, indeed, to catch their expression; but their colour and shape, and the eyelashes, so remarkably fine, might be copied.
at that moment they were met from another walk by mrs. hurst and elizabeth herself.
i did not know that you intended to walk, said miss bingley, in some confusion, lest they had been overheard.
you used us abominably ill, answered mrs. hurst, running away without telling us that you were coming out.
then taking the disengaged arm of mr. darcy, she left elizabeth to walk by herself.
the path just admitted three.
mr. darcy felt their rudeness, and immediately said, this walk is not wide enough for our party.
we had better go into the avenue.
but elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to remain with them, laughingly answered, no, no; stay where you are.
you are charmingly grouped, and appear to uncommon advantage.
the picturesque would be spoilt by admitting a fourth.
goodbye.
she then ran gaily off, rejoicing, as she rambled about, in the hope of being at home again in a day or two.
jane was already so much recovered as to intend leaving her room for a couple of hours that evening.
illustration: piling up the fire copyright 1894 by george allen.
chapter xi.
illustration when the ladies removed after dinner elizabeth ran up to her sister, and seeing her well guarded from cold, attended her into the drawingroom, where she was welcomed by her two friends with many professions of pleasure; and elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable as they were during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared.
their powers of conversation were considerable.
they could describe an entertainment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laugh at their acquaintance with spirit.
but when the gentlemen entered, jane was no longer the first object; miss bingleys eyes were instantly turned towards darcy, and she had something to say to him before he had advanced many steps.
he addressed himself directly to miss bennet with a polite congratulation; mr. hurst also made her a slight bow, and said he was very glad; but diffuseness and warmth remained for bingleys salutation.
he was full of joy and attention.
the first half hour was spent in piling up the fire, lest she should suffer from the change of room; and she removed, at his desire, to the other side of the fireplace, that she might be farther from the door.
he then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to anyone else.
elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great delight.
when tea was over mr. hurst reminded his sisterinlaw of the cardtablebut in vain.
she had obtained private intelligence that mr. darcy did not wish for cards, and mr. hurst soon found even his open petition rejected.
she assured him that no one intended to play, and the silence of the whole party on the subject seemed to justify her.
mr. hurst had, therefore, nothing to do but to stretch himself on one of the sofas and go to sleep.
darcy took up a book.
miss bingley did the same; and mrs. hurst, principally occupied in playing with her bracelets and rings, joined now and then in her brothers conversation with miss bennet.
miss bingleys attention was quite as much engaged in watching mr. darcys progress through his book, as in reading her own; and she was perpetually either making some inquiry, or looking at his page.
she could not win him, however, to any conversation; he merely answered her question and read on.
at length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be amused with her own book, which she had only chosen because it was the second volume of his, she gave a great yawn and said, how pleasant it is to spend an evening in this way!
i declare, after all, there is no enjoyment like reading!
how much sooner one tires of anything than of a book!
when i have a house of my own, i shall be miserable if i have not an excellent library.
no one made any reply.
she then yawned again, threw aside her book, and cast her eyes round the room in quest of some amusement; when, hearing her brother mentioning a ball to miss bennet, she turned suddenly towards him and said, by the bye charles, are you really serious in meditating a dance at netherfield?
i would advise you, before you determine on it, to consult the wishes of the present party; i am much mistaken if there are not some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a pleasure.
if you mean darcy, cried her brother, he may go to bed, if he chooses, before it begins; but as for the ball, it is quite a settled thing, and as soon as nicholls has made white soup enough i shall send round my cards.
i should like balls infinitely better, she replied, if they were carried on in a different manner; but there is something insufferably tedious in the usual process of such a meeting.
it would surely be much more rational if conversation instead of dancing made the order of the day.
much more rational, my dear caroline, i dare say; but it would not be near so much like a ball.
miss bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards got up and walked about the room.
her figure was elegant, and she walked well; but darcy, at whom it was all aimed, was still inflexibly studious.
in the desperation of her feelings, she resolved on one effort more; and, turning to elizabeth, said, miss eliza bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example, and take a turn about the room.
i assure you it is very refreshing after sitting so long in one attitude.
elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately.
miss bingley succeeded no less in the real object of her civility: mr. darcy looked up.
he was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter as elizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously closed his book.
he was directly invited to join their party, but he declined it, observing that he could imagine but two motives for their choosing to walk up and down the room together, with either of which motives his joining them would interfere.
what could he mean?
she was dying to know what could be his meaningand asked elizabeth whether she could at all understand him.
not at all, was her answer; but, depend upon it, he means to be severe on us, and our surest way of disappointing him will be to ask nothing about it.
miss bingley, however, was incapable of disappointing mr. darcy in anything, and persevered, therefore, in requiring an explanation of his two motives.
i have not the smallest objection to explaining them, said he, as soon as she allowed him to speak.
you either choose this method of passing the evening because you are in each others confidence, and have secret affairs to discuss, or because you are conscious that your figures appear to the greatest advantage in walking: if the first, i should be completely in your way; and if the second, i can admire you much better as i sit by the fire.
oh, shocking!
cried miss bingley.
i never heard anything so abominable.
how shall we punish him for such a speech?
nothing so easy, if you have but the inclination, said elizabeth.
we can all plague and punish one another.
tease himlaugh at him.
intimate as you are, you must know how it is to be done.
but upon my honour i do not.
i do assure you that my intimacy has not yet taught me that.
tease calmness of temper and presence of mind!
no, no; i feel he may defy us there.
and as to laughter, we will not expose ourselves, if you please, by attempting to laugh without a subject.
mr. darcy may hug himself.
mr. darcy is not to be laughed at!
cried elizabeth.
that is an uncommon advantage, and uncommon i hope it will continue, for it would be a great loss to me to have many such acquaintance.
i dearly love a laugh.
miss bingley, said he, has given me credit for more than can be.
the wisest and best of men,nay, the wisest and best of their actions,may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life is a joke.
certainly, replied elizabeth, there are such people, but i hope i am not one of them.
i hope i never ridicule what is wise or good.
follies and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies, do divert me, i own, and i laugh at them whenever i can.
but these, i suppose, are precisely what you are without.
perhaps that is not possible for anyone.
but it has been the study of my life to avoid those weaknesses which often expose a strong understanding to ridicule.
such as vanity and pride.
yes, vanity is a weakness indeed.
but pridewhere there is a real superiority of mindpride will be always under good regulation.
elizabeth turned away to hide a smile.
your examination of mr. darcy is over, i presume, said miss bingley; and pray what is the result?
i am perfectly convinced by it that mr. darcy has no defect.
he owns it himself without disguise.
no, said darcy, i have made no such pretension.
i have faults enough, but they are not, i hope, of understanding.
my temper i dare not vouch for.
it is, i believe, too little yielding; certainly too little for the convenience of the world.
i cannot forget the follies and vices of others so soon as i ought, nor their offences against myself.
my feelings are not puffed about with every attempt to move them.
my temper would perhaps be called resentful.
my good opinion once lost is lost for ever.
that is a failing, indeed!
cried elizabeth.
implacable resentment is a shade in a character.
but you have chosen your fault well.
i really cannot laugh at it.
you are safe from me.
there is, i believe, in every disposition a tendency to some particular evil, a natural defect, which not even the best education can overcome.
and your defect is a propensity to hate everybody.
and yours, he replied, with a smile, is wilfully to misunderstand them.
do let us have a little music, cried miss bingley, tired of a conversation in which she had no share.
louisa, you will not mind my waking mr. hurst.
her sister made not the smallest objection, and the pianoforte was opened; and darcy, after a few moments recollection, was not sorry for it.
he began to feel the danger of paying elizabeth too much attention.
illustration chapter xii.
illustration in consequence of an agreement between the sisters, elizabeth wrote the next morning to her mother, to beg that the carriage might be sent for them in the course of the day.
but mrs. bennet, who had calculated on her daughters remaining at netherfield till the following tuesday, which would exactly finish janes week, could not bring herself to receive them with pleasure before.
her answer, therefore, was not propitious, at least not to elizabeths wishes, for she was impatient to get home.
mrs. bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the carriage before tuesday; and in her postscript it was added, that if mr. bingley and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare them very well.
against staying longer, however, elizabeth was positively resolvednor did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the contrary, of being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long, she urged jane to borrow mr. bingleys carriage immediately, and at length it was settled that their original design of leaving netherfield that morning should be mentioned, and the request made.
the communication excited many professions of concern; and enough was said of wishing them to stay at least till the following day to work on jane; and till the morrow their going was deferred.
miss bingley was then sorry that she had proposed the delay; for her jealousy and dislike of one sister much exceeded her affection for the other.
the master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so soon, and repeatedly tried to persuade miss bennet that it would not be safe for herthat she was not enough recovered; but jane was firm where she felt herself to be right.
to mr. darcy it was welcome intelligence: elizabeth had been at netherfield long enough.
she attracted him more than he liked; and miss bingley was uncivil to her and more teasing than usual to himself.
he wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration should now escape himnothing that could elevate her with the hope of influencing his felicity; sensible that, if such an idea had been suggested, his behaviour during the last day must have material weight in confirming or crushing it.
steady to his purpose, he scarcely spoke ten words to her through the whole of saturday: and though they were at one time left by themselves for half an hour, he adhered most conscientiously to his book, and would not even look at her.
on sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost all, took place.
miss bingleys civility to elizabeth increased at last very rapidly, as well as her affection for jane; and when they parted, after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give her to see her either at longbourn or netherfield, and embracing her most tenderly, she even shook hands with the former.
elizabeth took leave of the whole party in the liveliest spirits.
they were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother.
mrs. bennet wondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to give so much trouble, and was sure jane would have caught cold again.
but their father, though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was really glad to see them; he had felt their importance in the family circle.
the evening conversation, when they were all assembled, had lost much of its animation, and almost all its sense, by the absence of jane and elizabeth.
they found mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough bass and human nature; and had some new extracts to admire and some new observations of threadbare morality to listen to.
catherine and lydia had information for them of a different sort.
much had been done, and much had been said in the regiment since the preceding wednesday; several of the officers had dined lately with their uncle; a private had been flogged; and it had actually been hinted that colonel forster was going to be married.
illustration chapter xiii illustration i hope, my dear, said mr. bennet to his wife, as they were at breakfast the next morning, that you have ordered a good dinner today, because i have reason to expect an addition to our family party.
who do you mean, my dear?
i know of nobody that is coming, i am sure, unless charlotte lucas should happen to call in; and i hope my dinners are good enough for her.
i do not believe she often sees such at home.
the person of whom i speak is a gentleman and a stranger.
mrs. bennets eyes sparkled.
a gentleman and a stranger!
it is mr. bingley, i am sure.
why, janeyou never dropped a word of thisyou sly thing!
well, i am sure i shall be extremely glad to see mr. bingley.
butgood lord!
how unlucky!
there is not a bit of fish to be got today.
lydia, my love, ring the bell.
i must speak to hill this moment.
it is not mr. bingley, said her husband; it is a person whom i never saw in the whole course of my life.
this roused a general astonishment; and he had the pleasure of being eagerly questioned by his wife and five daughters at once.
after amusing himself some time with their curiosity, he thus explained:about a month ago i received this letter, and about a fortnight ago i answered it; for i thought it a case of some delicacy, and requiring early attention.
it is from my cousin, mr. collins, who, when i am dead, may turn you all out of this house as soon as he pleases.
oh, my dear, cried his wife, i cannot bear to hear that mentioned.
pray do not talk of that odious man.
i do think it is the hardest thing in the world, that your estate should be entailed away from your own children; and i am sure, if i had been you, i should have tried long ago to do something or other about it.
jane and elizabeth attempted to explain to her the nature of an entail.
they had often attempted it before: but it was a subject on which mrs. bennet was beyond the reach of reason; and she continued to rail bitterly against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a family of five daughters, in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything about.
it certainly is a most iniquitous affair, said mr. bennet; and nothing can clear mr. collins from the guilt of inheriting longbourn.
but if you will listen to his letter, you may, perhaps, be a little softened by his manner of expressing himself.
no, that i am sure i shall not: and i think it was very impertinent of him to write to you at all, and very hypocritical.
i hate such false friends.
why could not he keep on quarrelling with you, as his father did before him?
why, indeed, he does seem to have had some filial scruples on that head, as you will hear.
right hunsford, near westerham, kent, 15th october.
dear sir, the disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late honoured father always gave me much uneasiness; and, since i have had the misfortune to lose him, i have frequently wished to heal the breach: but, for some time, i was kept back by my own doubts, fearing lest it might seem disrespectful to his memory for me to be on good terms with anyone with whom it had always pleased him to be at variance.there, mrs. bennet.my mind, however, is now made up on the subject; for, having received ordination at easter, i have been so fortunate as to be distinguished by the patronage of the right honourable lady catherine de bourgh, widow of sir lewis de bourgh, whose bounty and beneficence has preferred me to the valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall be my earnest endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards her ladyship, and be ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies which are instituted by the church of england.
as a clergyman, moreover, i feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing of peace in all families within the reach of my influence; and on these grounds i flatter myself that my present overtures of goodwill are highly commendable, and that the circumstance of my being next in the entail of longbourn estate will be kindly overlooked on your side, and not lead you to reject the offered olive branch.
i cannot be otherwise than concerned at being the means of injuring your amiable daughters, and beg leave to apologize for it, as well as to assure you of my readiness to make them every possible amends; but of this hereafter.
if you should have no objection to receive me into your house, i propose myself the satisfaction of waiting on you and your family, monday, november 18th, by four oclock, and shall probably trespass on your hospitality till the saturday sennight following, which i can do without any inconvenience, as lady catherine is far from objecting to my occasional absence on a sunday, provided that some other clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day.
i remain, dear sir, with respectful compliments to your lady and daughters, your wellwisher and friend, william collins.
at four oclock, therefore, we may expect this peacemaking gentleman, said mr. bennet, as he folded up the letter.
he seems to be a most conscientious and polite young man, upon my word; and, i doubt not, will prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if lady catherine should be so indulgent as to let him come to us again.
there is some sense in what he says about the girls, however; and, if he is disposed to make them any amends, i shall not be the person to discourage him.
though it is difficult, said jane, to guess in what way he can mean to make us the atonement he thinks our due, the wish is certainly to his credit.
elizabeth was chiefly struck with his extraordinary deference for lady catherine, and his kind intention of christening, marrying, and burying his parishioners whenever it were required.
he must be an oddity, i think, said she.
i cannot make him out.
there is something very pompous in his style.
and what can he mean by apologizing for being next in the entail?
we cannot suppose he would help it, if he could.
can he be a sensible man, sir?
no, my dear; i think not.
i have great hopes of finding him quite the reverse.
there is a mixture of servility and selfimportance in his letter which promises well.
i am impatient to see him.
in point of composition, said mary, his letter does not seem defective.
the idea of the olive branch perhaps is not wholly new, yet i think it is well expressed.
to catherine and lydia neither the letter nor its writer were in any degree interesting.
it was next to impossible that their cousin should come in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks since they had received pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour.
as for their mother, mr. collinss letter had done away much of her illwill, and she was preparing to see him with a degree of composure which astonished her husband and daughters.
mr. collins was punctual to his time, and was received with great politeness by the whole family.
mr. bennet indeed said little; but the ladies were ready enough to talk, and mr. collins seemed neither in need of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent himself.
he was a tall, heavylooking young man of fiveandtwenty.
his air was grave and stately, and his manners were very formal.
he had not been long seated before he complimented mrs. bennet on having so fine a family of daughters, said he had heard much of their beauty, but that, in this instance, fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that he did not doubt her seeing them all in due time well disposed of in marriage.
this gallantry was not much to the taste of some of his hearers; but mrs. bennet, who quarrelled with no compliments, answered most readily, you are very kind, sir, i am sure; and i wish with all my heart it may prove so; for else they will be destitute enough.
things are settled so oddly.
you allude, perhaps, to the entail of this estate.
ah, sir, i do indeed.
it is a grievous affair to my poor girls, you must confess.
not that i mean to find fault with you, for such things, i know, are all chance in this world.
there is no knowing how estates will go when once they come to be entailed.
i am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins, and could say much on the subject, but that i am cautious of appearing forward and precipitate.
but i can assure the young ladies that i come prepared to admire them.
at present i will not say more, but, perhaps, when we are better acquainted he was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on each other.
they were not the only objects of mr. collinss admiration.
the hall, the diningroom, and all its furniture, were examined and praised; and his commendation of everything would have touched mrs. bennets heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing it all as his own future property.
the dinner, too, in its turn, was highly admired; and he begged to know to which of his fair cousins the excellence of its cookery was owing.
but here he was set right by mrs. bennet, who assured him, with some asperity, that they were very well able to keep a good cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen.
he begged pardon for having displeased her.
in a softened tone she declared herself not at all offended; but he continued to apologize for about a quarter of an hour.
illustration chapter xiv illustration during dinner, mr. bennet scarcely spoke at all; but when the servants were withdrawn, he thought it time to have some conversation with his guest, and therefore started a subject in which he expected him to shine, by observing that he seemed very fortunate in his patroness.
lady catherine de bourghs attention to his wishes, and consideration for his comfort, appeared very remarkable.
mr. bennet could not have chosen better.
mr. collins was eloquent in her praise.
the subject elevated him to more than usual solemnity of manner; and with a most important aspect he protested that he had never in his life witnessed such behaviour in a person of ranksuch affability and condescension, as he had himself experienced from lady catherine.
she had been graciously pleased to approve of both the discourses which he had already had the honour of preaching before her.
she had also asked him twice to dine at rosings, and had sent for him only the saturday before, to make up her pool of quadrille in the evening.
lady catherine was reckoned proud by many people, he knew, but he had never seen anything but affability in her.
she had always spoken to him as she would to any other gentleman; she made not the smallest objection to his joining in the society of the neighbourhood, nor to his leaving his parish occasionally for a week or two to visit his relations.
she had even condescended to advise him to marry as soon as he could, provided he chose with discretion; and had once paid him a visit in his humble parsonage, where she had perfectly approved all the alterations he had been making, and had even vouchsafed to suggest some herself,some shelves in the closets upstairs.
that is all very proper and civil, i am sure, said mrs. bennet, and i dare say she is a very agreeable woman.
it is a pity that great ladies in general are not more like her.
does she live near you, sir?
the garden in which stands my humble abode is separated only by a lane from rosings park, her ladyships residence.
i think you said she was a widow, sir?
has she any family?
she has one only daughter, the heiress of rosings, and of very extensive property.
ah, cried mrs. bennet, shaking her head, then she is better off than many girls.
and what sort of young lady is she?
is she handsome?
she is a most charming young lady, indeed.
lady catherine herself says that, in point of true beauty, miss de bourgh is far superior to the handsomest of her sex; because there is that in her features which marks the young woman of distinguished birth.
she is unfortunately of a sickly constitution, which has prevented her making that progress in many accomplishments which she could not otherwise have failed of, as i am informed by the lady who superintended her education, and who still resides with them.
but she is perfectly amiable, and often condescends to drive by my humble abode in her little phaeton and ponies.
has she been presented?
i do not remember her name among the ladies at court.
her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her being in town; and by that means, as i told lady catherine myself one day, has deprived the british court of its brightest ornament.
her ladyship seemed pleased with the idea; and you may imagine that i am happy on every occasion to offer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable to ladies.
i have more than once observed to lady catherine, that her charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess; and that the most elevated rank, instead of giving her consequence, would be adorned by her.
these are the kind of little things which please her ladyship, and it is a sort of attention which i conceive myself peculiarly bound to pay.
you judge very properly, said mr. bennet; and it is happy for you that you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy.
may i ask whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the moment, or are the result of previous study?
they arise chiefly from what is passing at the time; and though i sometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such little elegant compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions, i always wish to give them as unstudied an air as possible.
mr. bennets expectations were fully answered.
his cousin was as absurd as he had hoped; and he listened to him with the keenest enjoyment, maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance, and, except in an occasional glance at elizabeth, requiring no partner in his pleasure.
by teatime, however, the dose had been enough, and mr. bennet was glad to take his guest into the drawingroom again, and when tea was over, glad to invite him illustration: protested that he never read novels h.t feb 94  to read aloud to the ladies.
mr. collins readily assented, and a book was produced; but on beholding it (for everything announced it to be from a circulating library) he started back, and, begging pardon, protested that he never read novels.
kitty stared at him, and lydia exclaimed.
other books were produced, and after some deliberation he chose fordyces sermons.
lydia gaped as he opened the volume; and before he had, with very monotonous solemnity, read three pages, she interrupted him with, do you know, mamma, that my uncle philips talks of turning away richard?
and if he does, colonel forster will hire him.
my aunt told me so herself on saturday.
i shall walk to meryton tomorrow to hear more about it, and to ask when mr. denny comes back from town.
lydia was bid by her two eldest sisters to hold her tongue; but mr. collins, much offended, laid aside his book, and said, i have often observed how little young ladies are interested by books of a serious stamp, though written solely for their benefit.
it amazes me, i confess; for certainly there can be nothing so advantageous to them as instruction.
but i will no longer importune my young cousin.
then, turning to mr. bennet, he offered himself as his antagonist at backgammon.
mr. bennet accepted the challenge, observing that he acted very wisely in leaving the girls to their own trifling amusements.
mrs. bennet and her daughters apologized most civilly for lydias interruption, and promised that it should not occur again, if he would resume his book; but mr. collins, after assuring them that he bore his young cousin no illwill, and should never resent her behaviour as any affront, seated himself at another table with mr. bennet, and prepared for backgammon.
illustration chapter xv.
illustration mr. collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature had been but little assisted by education or society; the greatest part of his life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate and miserly father; and though he belonged to one of the universities, he had merely kept the necessary terms without forming at it any useful acquaintance.
the subjection in which his father had brought him up had given him originally great humility of manner; but it was now a good deal counteracted by the selfconceit of a weak head, living in retirement, and the consequential feelings of early and unexpected prosperity.
a fortunate chance had recommended him to lady catherine de bourgh when the living of hunsford was vacant; and the respect which he felt for her high rank, and his veneration for her as his patroness, mingling with a very good opinion of himself, of his authority as a clergyman, and his right as a rector, made him altogether a mixture of pride and obsequiousness, selfimportance and humility.
having now a good house and a very sufficient income, he intended to marry; and in seeking a reconciliation with the longbourn family he had a wife in view, as he meant to choose one of the daughters, if he found them as handsome and amiable as they were represented by common report.
this was his plan of amendsof atonementfor inheriting their fathers estate; and he thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility and suitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his own part.
his plan did not vary on seeing them.
miss bennets lovely face confirmed his views, and established all his strictest notions of what was due to seniority; and for the first evening she was his settled choice.
the next morning, however, made an alteration; for in a quarter of an hours ttette with mrs. bennet before breakfast, a conversation beginning with his parsonagehouse, and leading naturally to the avowal of his hopes, that a mistress for it might be found at longbourn, produced from her, amid very complaisant smiles and general encouragement, a caution against the very jane he had fixed on.
as to her younger daughters, she could not take upon her to sayshe could not positively answerbut she did not know of any prepossession;her eldest daughter she must just mentionshe felt it incumbent on her to hint, was likely to be very soon engaged.
mr. collins had only to change from jane to elizabethand it was soon donedone while mrs. bennet was stirring the fire.
elizabeth, equally next to jane in birth and beauty, succeeded her of course.
mrs. bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon have two daughters married; and the man whom she could not bear to speak of the day before, was now high in her good graces.
lydias intention of walking to meryton was not forgotten: every sister except mary agreed to go with her; and mr. collins was to attend them, at the request of mr. bennet, who was most anxious to get rid of him, and have his library to himself; for thither mr. collins had followed him after breakfast, and there he would continue, nominally engaged with one of the largest folios in the collection, but really talking to mr. bennet, with little cessation, of his house and garden at hunsford.
such doings discomposed mr. bennet exceedingly.
in his library he had been always sure of leisure and tranquillity; and though prepared, as he told elizabeth, to meet with folly and conceit in every other room in the house, he was used to be free from them there: his civility, therefore, was most prompt in inviting mr. collins to join his daughters in their walk; and mr. collins, being in fact much better fitted for a walker than a reader, was extremely well pleased to close his large book, and go.
in pompous nothings on his side, and civil assents on that of his cousins, their time passed till they entered meryton.
the attention of the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by him.
their eyes were immediately wandering up the street in quest of the officers, and nothing less than a very smart bonnet, indeed, or a really new muslin in a shop window, could recall them.
but the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man, whom they had never seen before, of most gentlemanlike appearance, walking with an officer on the other side of the way.
the officer was the very mr. denny concerning whose return from london lydia came to inquire, and he bowed as they passed.
all were struck with the strangers air, all wondered who he could be; and kitty and lydia, determined if possible to find out, led the way across the street, under pretence of wanting something in an opposite shop, and fortunately had just gained the pavement, when the two gentlemen, turning back, had reached the same spot.
mr. denny addressed them directly, and entreated permission to introduce his friend, mr. wickham, who had returned with him the day before from town, and, he was happy to say, had accepted a commission in their corps.
this was exactly as it should be; for the young man wanted only regimentals to make him completely charming.
his appearance was greatly in his favour: he had all the best parts of beauty, a fine countenance, a good figure, and very pleasing address.
the introduction was followed up on his side by a happy readiness of conversationa readiness at the same time perfectly correct and unassuming; and the whole party were still standing and talking together very agreeably, when the sound of horses drew their notice, and darcy and bingley were seen riding down the street.
on distinguishing the ladies of the group the two gentlemen came directly towards them, and began the usual civilities.
bingley was the principal spokesman, and miss bennet the principal object.
he was then, he said, on his way to longbourn on purpose to inquire after her.
mr. darcy corroborated it with a bow, and was beginning to determine not to fix his eyes on elizabeth, when they were suddenly arrested by the sight of the stranger; and elizabeth happening to see the countenance of both as they looked at each other, was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting.
both changed colour, one looked white, the other red.
mr. wickham, after a few moments, touched his hata salutation which mr. darcy just deigned to return.
what could be the meaning of it?
it was impossible to imagine; it was impossible not to long to know.
in another minute mr. bingley, but without seeming to have noticed what passed, took leave and rode on with his friend.
mr. denny and mr. wickham walked with the young ladies to the door of mr. philipss house, and then made their bows, in spite of miss lydias pressing entreaties that they would come in, and even in spite of mrs. philipss throwing up the parlour window, and loudly seconding the invitation.
mrs. philips was always glad to see her nieces; and the two eldest, from their recent absence, were particularly welcome; and she was eagerly expressing her surprise at their sudden return home, which, as their own carriage had not fetched them, she should have known nothing about, if she had not happened to see mr. joness shopboy in the street, who had told her that they were not to send any more draughts to netherfield, because the miss bennets were come away, when her civility was claimed towards mr. collins by janes introduction of him.
she received him with her very best politeness, which he returned with as much more, apologizing for his intrusion, without any previous acquaintance with her, which he could not help flattering himself, however, might be justified by his relationship to the young ladies who introduced him to her notice.
mrs. philips was quite awed by such an excess of good breeding; but her contemplation of one stranger was soon put an end to by exclamations and inquiries about the other, of whom, however, she could only tell her nieces what they already knew, that mr. denny had brought him from london, and that he was to have a lieutenants commission in the shire.
she had been watching him the last hour, she said, as he walked up and down the street,and had mr. wickham appeared, kitty and lydia would certainly have continued the occupation; but unluckily no one passed the windows now except a few of the officers, who, in comparison with the stranger, were become stupid, disagreeable fellows.
some of them were to dine with the philipses the next day, and their aunt promised to make her husband call on mr. wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from longbourn would come in the evening.
this was agreed to; and mrs. philips protested that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery tickets, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards.
the prospect of such delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits.
mr. collins repeated his apologies in quitting the room, and was assured, with unwearying civility, that they were perfectly needless.
as they walked home, elizabeth related to jane what she had seen pass between the two gentlemen; but though jane would have defended either or both, had they appeared to be wrong, she could no more explain such behaviour than her sister.
mr. collins on his return highly gratified mrs. bennet by admiring mrs. philipss manners and politeness.
he protested that, except lady catherine and her daughter, he had never seen a more elegant woman; for she had not only received him with the utmost civility, but had even pointedly included him in her invitation for the next evening, although utterly unknown to her before.
something, he supposed, might be attributed to his connection with them, but yet he had never met with so much attention in the whole course of his life.
illustration chapter xvi.
illustration as no objection was made to the young peoples engagement with their aunt, and all mr. collinss scruples of leaving mr. and mrs. bennet for a single evening during his visit were most steadily resisted, the coach conveyed him and his five cousins at a suitable hour to meryton; and the girls had the pleasure of hearing, as they entered the drawingroom, that mr. wickham had accepted their uncles invitation, and was then in the house.
when this information was given, and they had all taken their seats, mr. collins was at leisure to look around him and admire, and he was so much struck with the size and furniture of the apartment, that he declared he might almost have supposed himself in the small summer breakfast parlour at rosings; a comparison that did not at first convey much gratification; but when mrs. philips understood from him what rosings was, and who was its proprietor, when she had listened to the description of only one of lady catherines drawingrooms, and found that the chimneypiece alone had cost eight hundred pounds, she felt all the force of the compliment, and would hardly have resented a comparison with the housekeepers room.
in describing to her all the grandeur of lady catherine and her mansion, with occasional digressions in praise of his own humble abode, and the improvements it was receiving, he was happily employed until the gentlemen joined them; and he found in mrs. philips a very attentive listener, whose opinion of his consequence increased with what she heard, and who was resolving to retail it all among her neighbours as soon as she could.
to the girls, who could not listen to their cousin, and who had nothing to do but to wish for an instrument, and examine their own indifferent imitations of china on the mantelpiece, the interval of waiting appeared very long.
it was over at last, however.
the gentlemen did approach: and when mr. wickham walked into the room, elizabeth felt that she had neither been seeing him before, nor thinking of him since, with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration.
the officers of the shire were in general a very creditable, gentlemanlike set and the best of them were of the present party; but mr, wickham was as far beyond them all in person, countenance, air, and walk, as they were superior to the broadfaced stuffy uncle philips, breathing port wine, who followed them into the room.
illustration: the officers of the shire copyright 1894 by george allen.
mr. wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was turned, and elizabeth was the happy woman by whom he finally seated himself; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell into conversation, though it was only on its being a wet night, and on the probability of a rainy season, made her feel that the commonest, dullest, most threadbare topic might be rendered interesting by the skill of the speaker.
with such rivals for the notice of the fair as mr. wickham and the officers, mr. collins seemed to sink into insignificance; to the young ladies he certainly was nothing; but he had still at intervals a kind listener in mrs. philips, and was, by her watchfulness, most abundantly supplied with coffee and muffin.
when the card tables were placed, he had an opportunity of obliging her, in return, by sitting down to whist.
i know little of the game at present, said he, but i shall be glad to improve myself; for in my situation of life mrs. philips was very thankful for his compliance, but could not wait for his reason.
mr. wickham did not play at whist, and with ready delight was he received at the other table between elizabeth and lydia.
at first there seemed danger of lydias engrossing him entirely, for she was a most determined talker; but being likewise extremely fond of lottery tickets, she soon grew too much interested in the game, too eager in making bets and exclaiming after prizes, to have attention for anyone in particular.
allowing for the common demands of the game, mr. wickham was therefore at leisure to talk to elizabeth, and she was very willing to hear him, though what she chiefly wished to hear she could not hope to be told, the history of his acquaintance with mr. darcy.
she dared not even mention that gentleman.
her curiosity, however, was unexpectedly relieved.
mr. wickham began the subject himself.
he inquired how far netherfield was from meryton; and, after receiving her answer, asked in a hesitating manner how long mr. darcy had been staying there.
about a month, said elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the subject drop, added, he is a man of very large property in derbyshire, i understand.
yes, replied wickham; his estate there is a noble one.
a clear ten thousand per annum.
you could not have met with a person more capable of giving you certain information on that head than myselffor i have been connected with his family, in a particular manner, from my infancy.
elizabeth could not but look surprised.
you may well be surprised, miss bennet, at such an assertion, after seeing, as you probably might, the very cold manner of our meeting yesterday.
are you much acquainted with mr. darcy?
as much as i ever wish to be, cried elizabeth, warmly.
i have spent four days in the same house with him, and i think him very disagreeable.
i have no right to give my opinion, said wickham, as to his being agreeable or otherwise.
i am not qualified to form one.
i have known him too long and too well to be a fair judge.
it is impossible for me to be impartial.
but i believe your opinion of him would in general astonishand, perhaps, you would not express it quite so strongly anywhere else.
here you are in your own family.
upon my word i say no more here than i might say in any house in the neighbourhood, except netherfield.
he is not at all liked in hertfordshire.
everybody is disgusted with his pride.
you will not find him more favourably spoken of by anyone.
i cannot pretend to be sorry, said wickham, after a short interruption, that he or that any man should not be estimated beyond their deserts; but with him i believe it does not often happen.
the world is blinded by his fortune and consequence, or frightened by his high and imposing manners, and sees him only as he chooses to be seen.
i should take him, even on my slight acquaintance, to be an illtempered man.
wickham only shook his head.
i wonder, said he, at the next opportunity of speaking, whether he is likely to be in this country much longer.
i do not at all know; but i heard nothing of his going away when i was at netherfield.
i hope your plans in favour of the shire will not be affected by his being in the neighbourhood.
oh noit is not for me to be driven away by mr. darcy.
if he wishes to avoid seeing me he must go.
we are not on friendly terms, and it always gives me pain to meet him, but i have no reason for avoiding him but what i might proclaim to all the worlda sense of very great illusage, and most painful regrets at his being what he is.
his father, miss bennet, the late mr. darcy, was one of the best men that ever breathed, and the truest friend i ever had; and i can never be in company with this mr. darcy without being grieved to the soul by a thousand tender recollections.
his behaviour to myself has been scandalous; but i verily believe i could forgive him anything and everything, rather than his disappointing the hopes and disgracing the memory of his father.
elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase, and listened with all her heart; but the delicacy of it prevented further inquiry.
mr. wickham began to speak on more general topics, meryton, the neighbourhood, the society, appearing highly pleased with all that he had yet seen, and speaking of the latter, especially, with gentle but very intelligible gallantry.
it was the prospect of constant society, and good society, he added, which was my chief inducement to enter the shire.
i know it to be a most respectable, agreeable corps; and my friend denny tempted me further by his account of their present quarters, and the very great attentions and excellent acquaintance meryton had procured them.
society, i own, is necessary to me.
i have been a disappointed man, and my spirits will not bear solitude.
i must have employment and society.
a military life is not what i was intended for, but circumstances have now made it eligible.
the church ought to have been my professioni was brought up for the church; and i should at this time have been in possession of a most valuable living, had it pleased the gentleman we were speaking of just now.
indeed!
yesthe late mr. darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the best living in his gift.
he was my godfather, and excessively attached to me.
i cannot do justice to his kindness.
he meant to provide for me amply, and thought he had done it; but when the living fell, it was given elsewhere.
good heavens!
cried elizabeth; but how could that be?
how could his will be disregarded?
why did not you seek legal redress?
there was just such an informality in the terms of the bequest as to give me no hope from law.
a man of honour could not have doubted the intention, but mr. darcy chose to doubt itor to treat it as a merely conditional recommendation, and to assert that i had forfeited all claim to it by extravagance, imprudence, in short, anything or nothing.
certain it is that the living became vacant two years ago, exactly as i was of an age to hold it, and that it was given to another man; and no less certain is it, that i cannot accuse myself of having really done anything to deserve to lose it.
i have a warm unguarded temper, and i may perhaps have sometimes spoken my opinion of him, and to him, too freely.
i can recall nothing worse.
but the fact is, that we are very different sort of men, and that he hates me.
this is quite shocking!
he deserves to be publicly disgraced.
some time or other he will bebut it shall not be by me.
till i can forget his father, i can never defy or expose him.
elizabeth honoured him for such feelings, and thought him handsomer than ever as he expressed them.
but what, said she, after a pause, can have been his motive?
what can have induced him to behave so cruelly?
a thorough, determined dislike of mea dislike which i cannot but attribute in some measure to jealousy.
had the late mr. darcy liked me less, his son might have borne with me better; but his fathers uncommon attachment to me irritated him, i believe, very early in life.
he had not a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stoodthe sort of preference which was often given me.
i had not thought mr. darcy so bad as thisthough i have never liked him, i had not thought so very ill of himi had supposed him to be despising his fellowcreatures in general, but did not suspect him of descending to such malicious revenge, such injustice, such inhumanity as this!
after a few minutes reflection, however, she continued, i do remember his boasting one day, at netherfield, of the implacability of his resentments, of his having an unforgiving temper.
his disposition must be dreadful.
i will not trust myself on the subject, replied wickham; i can hardly be just to him.
elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed, to treat in such a manner the godson, the friend, the favourite of his father!
she could have added, a young man, too, like you, whose very countenance may vouch for your being amiable.
but she contented herself withand one, too, who had probably been his own companion from childhood, connected together, as i think you said, in the closest manner.
we were born in the same parish, within the same park; the greatest part of our youth was passed together: inmates of the same house, sharing the same amusements, objects of the same parental care.
my father began life in the profession which your uncle, mr. philips, appears to do so much credit to; but he gave up everything to be of use to the late mr. darcy, and devoted all his time to the care of the pemberley property.
he was most highly esteemed by mr. darcy, a most intimate, confidential friend.
mr. darcy often acknowledged himself to be under the greatest obligations to my fathers active superintendence; and when, immediately before my fathers death, mr. darcy gave him a voluntary promise of providing for me, i am convinced that he felt it to be as much a debt of gratitude to him as of affection to myself.
how strange!
cried elizabeth.
how abominable!
i wonder that the very pride of this mr. darcy has not made him just to you.
if from no better motive, that he should not have been too proud to be dishonest,for dishonesty i must call it.
it is wonderful, replied wickham; for almost all his actions may be traced to pride; and pride has often been his best friend.
it has connected him nearer with virtue than any other feeling.
but we are none of us consistent; and in his behaviour to me there were stronger impulses even than pride.
can such abominable pride as his have ever done him good?
yes; it has often led him to be liberal and generous; to give his money freely, to display hospitality, to assist his tenants, and relieve the poor.
family pride, and filial pride, for he is very proud of what his father was, have done this.
not to appear to disgrace his family, to degenerate from the popular qualities, or lose the influence of the pemberley house, is a powerful motive.
he has also brotherly pride, which, with some brotherly affection, makes him a very kind and careful guardian of his sister; and you will hear him generally cried up as the most attentive and best of brothers.
what sort of a girl is miss darcy?
he shook his head.
i wish i could call her amiable.
it gives me pain to speak ill of a darcy; but she is too much like her brother,very, very proud.
as a child, she was affectionate and pleasing, and extremely fond of me; and i have devoted hours and hours to her amusement.
but she is nothing to me now.
she is a handsome girl, about fifteen or sixteen, and, i understand, highly accomplished.
since her fathers death her home has been london, where a lady lives with her, and superintends her education.
after many pauses and many trials of other subjects, elizabeth could not help reverting once more to the first, and saying, i am astonished at his intimacy with mr. bingley.
how can mr. bingley, who seems goodhumour itself, and is, i really believe, truly amiable, be in friendship with such a man?
how can they suit each other?
do you know mr. bingley?
not at all.
he is a sweettempered, amiable, charming man.
he cannot know what mr. darcy is.
probably not; but mr. darcy can please where he chooses.
he does not want abilities.
he can be a conversible companion if he thinks it worth his while.
among those who are at all his equals in consequence, he is a very different man from what he is to the less prosperous.
his pride never deserts him; but with the rich he is liberalminded, just, sincere, rational, honourable, and, perhaps, agreeable,allowing something for fortune and figure.
the whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered round the other table, and mr. collins took his station between his cousin elizabeth and mrs. philips.
the usual inquiries as to his success were made by the latter.
it had not been very great; he had lost every point; but when mrs. philips began to express her concern thereupon, he assured her, with much earnest gravity, that it was not of the least importance; that he considered the money as a mere trifle, and begged she would not make herself uneasy.
i know very well, madam, said he, that when persons sit down to a card table they must take their chance of these things,and happily i am not in such circumstances as to make five shillings any object.
there are, undoubtedly, many who could not say the same; but, thanks to lady catherine de bourgh, i am removed far beyond the necessity of regarding little matters.
mr. wickhams attention was caught; and after observing mr. collins for a few moments, he asked elizabeth in a low voice whether her relations were very intimately acquainted with the family of de bourgh.
lady catherine de bourgh, she replied, has very lately given him a living.
i hardly know how mr. collins was first introduced to her notice, but he certainly has not known her long.
you know of course that lady catherine de bourgh and lady anne darcy were sisters; consequently that she is aunt to the present mr. darcy.
no, indeed, i did not.
i knew nothing at all of lady catherines connections.
i never heard of her existence till the day before yesterday.
her daughter, miss de bourgh, will have a very large fortune, and it is believed that she and her cousin will unite the two estates.
this information made elizabeth smile, as she thought of poor miss bingley.
vain indeed must be all her attentions, vain and useless her affection for his sister and her praise of himself, if he were already selfdestined to another.
mr. collins, said she, speaks highly both of lady catherine and her daughter; but, from some particulars that he has related of her ladyship, i suspect his gratitude misleads him; and that, in spite of her being his patroness, she is an arrogant, conceited woman.
i believe her to be both in a great degree, replied wickham; i have not seen her for many years; but i very well remember that i never liked her, and that her manners were dictatorial and insolent.
she has the reputation of being remarkably sensible and clever; but i rather believe she derives part of her abilities from her rank and fortune, part from her authoritative manner, and the rest from the pride of her nephew, who chooses that everyone connected with him should have an understanding of the first class.
elizabeth allowed that he had given a very rational account of it, and they continued talking together with mutual satisfaction till supper put an end to cards, and gave the rest of the ladies their share of mr. wickhams attentions.
there could be no conversation in the noise of mrs. philipss supper party, but his manners recommended him to everybody.
whatever he said, was said well; and whatever he did, done gracefully.
elizabeth went away with her head full of him.
she could think of nothing but of mr. wickham, and of what he had told her, all the way home; but there was not time for her even to mention his name as they went, for neither lydia nor mr. collins were once silent.
lydia talked incessantly of lottery tickets, of the fish she had lost and the fish she had won; and mr. collins, in describing the civility of mr. and mrs. philips, protesting that he did not in the least regard his losses at whist, enumerating all the dishes at supper, and repeatedly fearing that he crowded his cousins, had more to say than he could well manage before the carriage stopped at longbourn house.
illustration: delighted to see their dear friend again  chapter xvii.
illustration elizabeth related to jane, the next day, what had passed between mr. wickham and herself.
jane listened with astonishment and concern: she knew not how to believe that mr. darcy could be so unworthy of mr. bingleys regard; and yet it was not in her nature to question the veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as wickham.
the possibility of his having really endured such unkindness was enough to interest all her tender feelings; and nothing therefore remained to be done but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each, and throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not be otherwise explained.
they have both, said she, been deceived, i dare say, in some way or other, of which we can form no idea.
interested people have perhaps misrepresented each to the other.
it is, in short, impossible for us to conjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them, without actual blame on either side.
very true, indeed; and now, my dear jane, what have you got to say in behalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in the business?
do clear them, too, or we shall be obliged to think ill of somebody.
laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of my opinion.
my dearest lizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful light it places mr. darcy, to be treating his fathers favourite in such a manner,one whom his father had promised to provide for.
it is impossible.
no man of common humanity, no man who had any value for his character, could be capable of it.
can his most intimate friends be so excessively deceived in him?
oh no.
i can much more easily believe mr. bingleys being imposed on than that mr. wickham should invent such a history of himself as he gave me last night; names, facts, everything mentioned without ceremony.
if it be not so, let mr. darcy contradict it.
besides, there was truth in his looks.
it is difficult, indeedit is distressing.
one does not know what to think.
i beg your pardon;one knows exactly what to think.
but jane could think with certainty on only one point,that mr. bingley, if he had been imposed on, would have much to suffer when the affair became public.
the two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery, where this conversation passed, by the arrival of some of the very persons of whom they had been speaking; mr. bingley and his sisters came to give their personal invitation for the long expected ball at netherfield, which was fixed for the following tuesday.
the two ladies were delighted to see their dear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and repeatedly asked what she had been doing with herself since their separation.
to the rest of the family they paid little attention; avoiding mrs. bennet as much as possible, saying not much to elizabeth, and nothing at all to the others.
they were soon gone again, rising from their seats with an activity which took their brother by surprise, and hurrying off as if eager to escape from mrs. bennets civilities.
the prospect of the netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to every female of the family.
mrs. bennet chose to consider it as given in compliment to her eldest daughter, and was particularly flattered by receiving the invitation from mr. bingley himself, instead of a ceremonious card.
jane pictured to herself a happy evening in the society of her two friends, and the attentions of their brother; and elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with mr. wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of everything in mr. darcys look and behaviour.
the happiness anticipated by catherine and lydia depended less on any single event, or any particular person; for though they each, like elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with mr. wickham, he was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and a ball was, at any rate, a ball.
and even mary could assure her family that she had no disinclination for it.
while i can have my mornings to myself, said she, it is enough.
i think it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements.
society has claims on us all; and i profess myself one of those who consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable for everybody.
elizabeths spirits were so high on the occasion, that though she did not often speak unnecessarily to mr. collins, she could not help asking him whether he intended to accept mr. bingleys invitation, and if he did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evenings amusement; and she was rather surprised to find that he entertained no scruple whatever on that head, and was very far from dreading a rebuke, either from the archbishop or lady catherine de bourgh, by venturing to dance.
i am by no means of opinion, i assure you, said he, that a ball of this kind, given by a young man of character, to respectable people, can have any evil tendency; and i am so far from objecting to dancing myself, that i shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all my fair cousins in the course of the evening; and i take this opportunity of soliciting yours, miss elizabeth, for the two first dances especially; a preference which i trust my cousin jane will attribute to the right cause, and not to any disrespect for her.
elizabeth felt herself completely taken in.
she had fully proposed being engaged by wickham for those very dances; and to have mr. collins instead!her liveliness had been never worse timed.
there was no help for it, however.
mr. wickhams happiness and her own was perforce delayed a little longer, and mr. collinss proposal accepted with as good a grace as she could.
she was not the better pleased with his gallantry, from the idea it suggested of something more.
it now first struck her, that she was selected from among her sisters as worthy of being the mistress of hunsford parsonage, and of assisting to form a quadrille table at rosings, in the absence of more eligible visitors.
the idea soon reached to conviction, as she observed his increasing civilities towards herself, and heard his frequent attempt at a compliment on her wit and vivacity; and though more astonished than gratified herself by this effect of her charms, it was not long before her mother gave her to understand that the probability of their marriage was exceedingly agreeable to her.
elizabeth, however, did not choose to take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be the consequence of any reply.
mr. collins might never make the offer, and, till he did, it was useless to quarrel about him.
if there had not been a netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, the younger miss bennets would have been in a pitiable state at this time; for, from the day of the invitation to the day of the ball, there was such a succession of rain as prevented their walking to meryton once.
no aunt, no officers, no news could be sought after; the very shoeroses for netherfield were got by proxy.
even elizabeth might have found some trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended the improvement of her acquaintance with mr. wickham; and nothing less than a dance on tuesday could have made such a friday, saturday, sunday, and monday endurable to kitty and lydia.
illustration chapter xviii.
illustration till elizabeth entered the drawingroom at netherfield, and looked in vain for mr. wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled, a doubt of his being present had never occurred to her.
the certainty of meeting him had not been checked by any of those recollections that might not unreasonably have alarmed her.
she had dressed with more than usual care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of all that remained unsubdued of his heart, trusting that it was not more than might be won in the course of the evening.
but in an instant arose the dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted, for mr. darcys pleasure, in the bingleys invitation to the officers; and though this was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence was pronounced by his friend mr. denny, to whom lydia eagerly applied, and who told them that wickham had been obliged to go to town on business the day before, and was not yet returned; adding, with a significant smile, i do not imagine his business would have called him away just now, if he had not wished to avoid a certain gentleman here.
this part of his intelligence, though unheard by lydia, was caught by elizabeth; and, as it assured her that darcy was not less answerable for wickhams absence than if her first surmise had been just, every feeling of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediate disappointment, that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility to the polite inquiries which he directly afterwards approached to make.
attention, forbearance, patience with darcy, was injury to wickham.
she was resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and turned away with a degree of illhumour which she could not wholly surmount even in speaking to mr. bingley, whose blind partiality provoked her.
but elizabeth was not formed for illhumour; and though every prospect of her own was destroyed for the evening, it could not dwell long on her spirits; and, having told all her griefs to charlotte lucas, whom she had not seen for a week, she was soon able to make a voluntary transition to the oddities of her cousin, and to point him out to her particular notice.
the two first dances, however, brought a return of distress: they were dances of mortification.
mr. collins, awkward and solemn, apologizing instead of attending, and often moving wrong without being aware of it, gave her all the shame and misery which a disagreeable partner for a couple of dances can give.
the moment of her release from him was ecstasy.
she danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of talking of wickham, and of hearing that he was universally liked.
when those dances were over, she returned to charlotte lucas, and was in conversation with her, when she found herself suddenly addressed by mr. darcy, who took her so much by surprise in his application for her hand, that, without knowing what she did, she accepted him.
he walked away again immediately, and she was left to fret over her own want of presence of mind: charlotte tried to console her.
i dare say you will find him very agreeable.
heaven forbid!
that would be the greatest misfortune of all!
to find a man agreeable whom one is determined to hate!
do not wish me such an evil.
when the dancing recommenced, however, and darcy approached to claim her hand, charlotte could not help cautioning her, in a whisper, not to be a simpleton, and allow her fancy for wickham to make her appear unpleasant in the eyes of a man often times his consequence.
elizabeth made no answer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the dignity to which she was arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to mr. darcy, and reading in her neighbours looks their equal amazement in beholding it.
they stood for some time without speaking a word; and she began to imagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and, at first, was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that it would be the greater punishment to her partner to oblige him to talk, she made some slight observation on the dance.
he replied, and was again silent.
after a pause of some minutes, she addressed him a second time, with it is your turn to say something now, mr. darcy.
i talked about the dance, and you ought to make some kind of remark on the size of the room, or the number of couples.
he smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished him to say should be said.
very well; that reply will do for the present.
perhaps, byandby, i may observe that private balls are much pleasanter than public ones; but now we may be silent.
do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?
sometimes.
one must speak a little, you know.
it would look odd to be entirely silent for half an hour together; and yet, for the advantage of some, conversation ought to be so arranged as that they may have the trouble of saying as little as possible.
are you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do you imagine that you are gratifying mine?
both, replied elizabeth archly; for i have always seen a great similarity in the turn of our minds.
we are each of an unsocial, taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to say something that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down to posterity with all the clat of a proverb.
this is no very striking resemblance of your own character, i am sure, said he.
how near it may be to mine, i cannot pretend to say.
you think it a faithful portrait, undoubtedly.
i must not decide on my own performance.
he made no answer; and they were again silent till they had gone down the dance, when he asked her if she and her sisters did not very often walk to meryton.
she answered in the affirmative; and, unable to resist the temptation, added, when you met us there the other day, we had just been forming a new acquaintance.
the effect was immediate.
a deeper shade of hauteur overspread his features, but he said not a word; and elizabeth, though blaming herself for her own weakness, could not go on.
at length darcy spoke, and in a constrained manner said, mr. wickham is blessed with such happy manners as may insure his making friends; whether he may be equally capable of retaining them, is less certain.
he has been so unlucky as to lose your friendship, replied elizabeth, with emphasis, and in a manner which he is likely to suffer from all his life.
darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject.
at that moment sir william lucas appeared close to them, meaning to pass through the set to the other side of the room; but, on perceiving mr. darcy, he stopped, with a bow of superior courtesy, to compliment him on his dancing and his partner.
i have been most highly gratified, indeed, my dear sir; such very superior dancing is not often seen.
it is evident that you belong to the first circles.
allow me to say, however, that your fair partner does not disgrace you: and that i must hope to have this pleasure often repeated, especially when a certain desirable event, my dear miss eliza (glancing at her sister and bingley), shall take place.
what congratulations will then flow in!
i appeal to mr. darcy;but let me not interrupt you, sir.
you will not thank me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of that young lady, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me.
illustration: such very superior dancing is not often seen.
copyright 1894 by george allen.
the latter part of this address was scarcely heard by darcy; but sir williams allusion to his friend seemed to strike him forcibly, and his eyes were directed, with a very serious expression, towards bingley and jane, who were dancing together.
recovering himself, however, shortly, he turned to his partner, and said, sir williams interruption has made me forget what we were talking of.
i do not think we were speaking at all.
sir william could not have interrupted any two people in the room who had less to say for themselves.
we have tried two or three subjects already without success, and what we are to talk of next i cannot imagine.
what think you of books?
said he, smiling.
booksoh no!i am sure we never read the same, or not with the same feelings.
i am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at least be no want of subject.
we may compare our different opinions.
noi cannot talk of books in a ballroom; my head is always full of something else.
the present always occupies you in such scenesdoes it?
said he, with a look of doubt.
yes, always, she replied, without knowing what she said; for her thoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon afterwards appeared by her suddenly exclaiming, i remember hearing you once say, mr. darcy, that you hardly ever forgave;that your resentment, once created, was unappeasable.
you are very cautious, i suppose, as to its being created?
i am, said he, with a firm voice.
and never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice?
i hope not.
it is particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion, to be secure of judging properly at first.
may i ask to what these questions tend?
merely to the illustration of your character, said she, endeavouring to shake off her gravity.
i am trying to make it out.
and what is your success?
she shook her head.
i do not get on at all.
i hear such different accounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly.
i can readily believe, answered he, gravely, that reports may vary greatly with respect to me; and i could wish, miss bennet, that you were not to sketch my character at the present moment, as there is reason to fear that the performance would reflect no credit on either.
but if i do not take your likeness now, i may never have another opportunity.
i would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours, he coldly replied.
she said no more, and they went down the other dance and parted in silence; on each side dissatisfied, though not to an equal degree; for in darcys breast there was a tolerably powerful feeling towards her, which soon procured her pardon, and directed all his anger against another.
they had not long separated when miss bingley came towards her, and, with an expression of civil disdain, thus accosted her, so, miss eliza, i hear you are quite delighted with george wickham?
your sister has been talking to me about him, and asking me a thousand questions; and i find that the young man forgot to tell you, among his other communications, that he was the son of old wickham, the late mr. darcys steward.
let me recommend you, however, as a friend, not to give implicit confidence to all his assertions; for, as to mr. darcys using him ill, it is perfectly false: for, on the contrary, he has been always remarkably kind to him, though george wickham has treated mr. darcy in a most infamous manner.
i do not know the particulars, but i know very well that mr. darcy is not in the least to blame; that he cannot bear to hear george wickham mentioned; and that though my brother thought he could not well avoid including him in his invitation to the officers, he was excessively glad to find that he had taken himself out of the way.
his coming into the country at all is a most insolent thing, indeed, and i wonder how he could presume to do it.
i pity you, miss eliza, for this discovery of your favourites guilt; but really, considering his descent, one could not expect much better.
his guilt and his descent appear, by your account, to be the same, said elizabeth, angrily; for i have heard you accuse him of nothing worse than of being the son of mr. darcys steward, and of that, i can assure you, he informed me himself.
i beg your pardon, replied miss bingley, turning away with a sneer.
excuse my interference; it was kindly meant.
insolent girl!
said elizabeth to herself.
you are much mistaken if you expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as this.
i see nothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of mr. darcy.
she then sought her eldest sister, who had undertaken to make inquiries on the same subject of bingley.
jane met her with a smile of such sweet complacency, a glow of such happy expression, as sufficiently marked how well she was satisfied with the occurrences of the evening.
elizabeth instantly read her feelings; and, at that moment, solicitude for wickham, resentment against his enemies, and everything else, gave way before the hope of janes being in the fairest way for happiness.
i want to know, said she, with a countenance no less smiling than her sisters, what you have learnt about mr. wickham.
but perhaps you have been too pleasantly engaged to think of any third person, in which case you may be sure of my pardon.
no, replied jane, i have not forgotten him; but i have nothing satisfactory to tell you.
mr. bingley does not know the whole of his history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which have principally offended mr. darcy; but he will vouch for the good conduct, the probity and honour, of his friend, and is perfectly convinced that mr. wickham has deserved much less attention from mr. darcy than he has received; and i am sorry to say that by his account, as well as his sisters, mr. wickham is by no means a respectable young man.
i am afraid he has been very imprudent, and has deserved to lose mr. darcys regard.
mr. bingley does not know mr. wickham himself.
no; he never saw him till the other morning at meryton.
this account then is what he has received from mr. darcy.
i am perfectly satisfied.
but what does he say of the living?
he does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though he has heard them from mr. darcy more than once, but he believes that it was left to him conditionally only.
i have not a doubt of mr. bingleys sincerity, said elizabeth warmly, but you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances only.
mr. bingleys defence of his friend was a very able one, i dare say; but since he is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learnt the rest from that friend himself, i shall venture still to think of both gentlemen as i did before.
she then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and on which there could be no difference of sentiment.
elizabeth listened with delight to the happy though modest hopes which jane entertained of bingleys regard, and said all in her power to heighten her confidence in it.
on their being joined by mr. bingley himself, elizabeth withdrew to miss lucas; to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of her last partner she had scarcely replied, before mr. collins came up to them, and told her with great exultation, that he had just been so fortunate as to make a most important discovery.
i have found out, said he, by a singular accident, that there is now in the room a near relation to my patroness.
i happened to overhear the gentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who does the honours of this house the names of his cousin miss de bourgh, and of her mother, lady catherine.
how wonderfully these sort of things occur!
who would have thought of my meeting withperhapsa nephew of lady catherine de bourgh in this assembly!
i am most thankful that the discovery is made in time for me to pay my respects to him, which i am now going to do, and trust he will excuse my not having done it before.
my total ignorance of the connection must plead my apology.
you are not going to introduce yourself to mr. darcy?
indeed i am.
i shall entreat his pardon for not having done it earlier.
i believe him to be lady catherines nephew.
it will be in my power to assure him that her ladyship was quite well yesterday sennight.
elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from such a scheme; assuring him that mr. darcy would consider his addressing him without introduction as an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt; that it was not in the least necessary there should be any notice on either side, and that if it were, it must belong to mr. darcy, the superior in consequence, to begin the acquaintance.
mr. collins listened to her with the determined air of following his own inclination, and when she ceased speaking, replied thus, my dear miss elizabeth, i have the highest opinion in the world of your excellent judgment in all matters within the scope of your understanding, but permit me to say that there must be a wide difference between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity and those which regulate the clergy; for, give me leave to observe that i consider the clerical office as equal in point of dignity with the highest rank in the kingdomprovided that a proper humility of behaviour is at the same time maintained.
you must, therefore, allow me to follow the dictates of my conscience on this occasion, which lead me to perform what i look on as a point of duty.
pardon me for neglecting to profit by your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant guide, though in the case before us i consider myself more fitted by education and habitual study to decide on what is right than a young lady like yourself; and with a low bow he left her to attack mr. darcy, whose reception of his advances she eagerly watched, and whose astonishment at being so addressed was very evident.
her cousin prefaced his speech with a solemn bow, and though she could not hear a word of it, she felt as if hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips the words apology, hunsford, and lady catherine de bourgh.
it vexed her to see him expose himself to such a man.
mr. darcy was eyeing him with unrestrained wonder; and when at last mr. collins allowed him to speak, replied with an air of distant civility.
mr. collins, however, was not discouraged from speaking again, and mr. darcys contempt seemed abundantly increasing with the length of his second speech; and at the end of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another way: mr. collins then returned to elizabeth.
i have no reason, i assure you, said he, to be dissatisfied with my reception.
mr. darcy seemed much pleased with the attention.
he answered me with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of saying, that he was so well convinced of lady catherines discernment as to be certain she could never bestow a favour unworthily.
it was really a very handsome thought.
upon the whole, i am much pleased with him.
as elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she turned her attention almost entirely on her sister and mr. bingley; and the train of agreeable reflections which her observations gave birth to made her perhaps almost as happy as jane.
she saw her in idea settled in that very house, in all the felicity which a marriage of true affection could bestow; and she felt capable, under such circumstances, of endeavouring even to like bingleys two sisters.
her mothers thoughts she plainly saw were bent the same way, and she determined not to venture near her, lest she might hear too much.
when they sat down to supper, therefore, she considered it a most unlucky perverseness which placed them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find that her mother was talking to that one person (lady lucas) freely, openly, and of nothing else but of her expectation that jane would be soon married to mr. bingley.
it was an animating subject, and mrs. bennet seemed incapable of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of the match.
his being such a charming young man, and so rich, and living but three miles from them, were the first points of selfgratulation; and then it was such a comfort to think how fond the two sisters were of jane, and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as she could do.
it was, moreover, such a promising thing for her younger daughters, as janes marrying so greatly must throw them in the way of other rich men; and, lastly, it was so pleasant at her time of life to be able to consign her single daughters to the care of their sister, that she might not be obliged to go into company more than she liked.
it was necessary to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure, because on such occasions it is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than mrs. bennet to find comfort in staying at home at any period of her life.
she concluded with many good wishes that lady lucas might soon be equally fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no chance of it.
in vain did elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mothers words, or persuade her to describe her felicity in a less audible whisper; for to her inexpressible vexation she could perceive that the chief of it was overheard by mr. darcy, who sat opposite to them.
her mother only scolded her for being nonsensical.
what is mr. darcy to me, pray, that i should be afraid of him?
i am sure we owe him no such particular civility as to be obliged to say nothing he may not like to hear.
for heavens sake, madam, speak lower.
what advantage can it be to you to offend mr. darcy?
you will never recommend yourself to his friend by so doing.
nothing that she could say, however, had any influence.
her mother would talk of her views in the same intelligible tone.
elizabeth blushed and blushed again with shame and vexation.
she could not help frequently glancing her eye at mr. darcy, though every glance convinced her of what she dreaded; for though he was not always looking at her mother, she was convinced that his attention was invariably fixed by her.
the expression of his face changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed and steady gravity.
at length, however, mrs. bennet had no more to say; and lady lucas, who had been long yawning at the repetition of delights which she saw no likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham and chicken.
elizabeth now began to revive.
but not long was the interval of tranquillity; for when supper was over, singing was talked of, and she had the mortification of seeing mary, after very little entreaty, preparing to oblige the company.
by many significant looks and silent entreaties did she endeavour to prevent such a proof of complaisance,but in vain; mary would not understand them; such an opportunity of exhibiting was delightful to her, and she began her song.
elizabeths eyes were fixed on her, with most painful sensations; and she watched her progress through the several stanzas with an impatience which was very ill rewarded at their close; for mary, on receiving amongst the thanks of the table the hint of a hope that she might be prevailed on to favour them again, after the pause of half a minute began another.
marys powers were by no means fitted for such a display; her voice was weak, and her manner affected.
elizabeth was in agonies.
she looked at jane to see how she bore it; but jane was very composedly talking to bingley.
she looked at his two sisters, and saw them making signs of derision at each other, and at darcy, who continued, however, impenetrably grave.
she looked at her father to entreat his interference, lest mary should be singing all night.
he took the hint, and, when mary had finished her second song, said aloud, that will do extremely well, child.
you have delighted us long enough.
let the other young ladies have time to exhibit.
mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and elizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry for her fathers speech, was afraid her anxiety had done no good.
others of the party were now applied to.
if i, said mr. collins, were so fortunate as to be able to sing, i should have great pleasure, i am sure, in obliging the company with an air; for i consider music as a very innocent diversion, and perfectly compatible with the profession of a clergyman.
i do not mean, however, to assert that we can be justified in devoting too much of our time to music, for there are certainly other things to be attended to.
the rector of a parish has much to do.
in the first place, he must make such an agreement for tithes as may be beneficial to himself and not offensive to his patron.
he must write his own sermons; and the time that remains will not be too much for his parish duties, and the care and improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be excused from making as comfortable as possible.
and i do not think it of light importance that he should have attentive and conciliatory manners towards everybody, especially towards those to whom he owes his preferment.
i cannot acquit him of that duty; nor could i think well of the man who should omit an occasion of testifying his respect towards anybody connected with the family.
and with a bow to mr. darcy, he concluded his speech, which had been spoken so loud as to be heard by half the room.
many staredmany smiled; but no one looked more amused than mr. bennet himself, while his wife seriously commended mr. collins for having spoken so sensibly, and observed, in a halfwhisper to lady lucas, that he was a remarkably clever, good kind of young man.
to elizabeth it appeared, that had her family made an agreement to expose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it would have been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit, or finer success; and happy did she think it for bingley and her sister that some of the exhibition had escaped his notice, and that his feelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which he must have witnessed.
that his two sisters and mr. darcy, however, should have such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations was bad enough; and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of the gentleman, or the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable.
the rest of the evening brought her little amusement.
she was teased by mr. collins, who continued most perseveringly by her side; and though he could not prevail with her to dance with him again, put it out of her power to dance with others.
in vain did she entreat him to stand up with somebody else, and offered to introduce him to any young lady in the room.
he assured her that, as to dancing, he was perfectly indifferent to it; that his chief object was, by delicate attentions, to recommend himself to her; and that he should therefore make a point of remaining close to her the whole evening.
there was no arguing upon such a project.
she owed her greatest relief to her friend miss lucas, who often joined them, and goodnaturedly engaged mr. collinss conversation to herself.
she was at least free from the offence of mr. darcys further notice: though often standing within a very short distance of her, quite disengaged, he never came near enough to speak.
she felt it to be the probable consequence of her allusions to mr. wickham, and rejoiced in it.
the longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart; and by a manuvre of mrs. bennet had to wait for their carriage a quarter of an hour after everybody else was gone, which gave them time to see how heartily they were wished away by some of the family.
mrs. hurst and her sister scarcely opened their mouths except to complain of fatigue, and were evidently impatient to have the house to themselves.
they repulsed every attempt of mrs. bennet at conversation, and, by so doing, threw a languor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by the long speeches of mr. collins, who was complimenting mr. bingley and his sisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality and politeness which had marked their behaviour to their guests.
darcy said nothing at all.
mr. bennet, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene.
mr. bingley and jane were standing together a little detached from the rest, and talked only to each other.
elizabeth preserved as steady a silence as either mrs. hurst or miss bingley; and even lydia was too much fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of lord, how tired i am!
accompanied by a violent yawn.
when at length they arose to take leave, mrs. bennet was most pressingly civil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at longbourn; and addressed herself particularly to mr. bingley, to assure him how happy he would make them, by eating a family dinner with them at any time, without the ceremony of a formal invitation.
bingley was all grateful pleasure; and he readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of waiting on her after his return from london, whither he was obliged to go the next day for a short time.
mrs. bennet was perfectly satisfied; and quitted the house under the delightful persuasion that, allowing for the necessary preparations of settlements, new carriages, and wedding clothes, she should undoubtedly see her daughter settled at netherfield in the course of three or four months.
of having another daughter married to mr. collins she thought with equal certainty, and with considerable, though not equal, pleasure.
elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and though the man and the match were quite good enough for her, the worth of each was eclipsed by mr. bingley and netherfield.
illustration: to assure you in the most animated language  chapter xix.
illustration the next day opened a new scene at longbourn.
mr. collins made his declaration in form.
having resolved to do it without loss of time, as his leave of absence extended only to the following saturday, and having no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even at the moment, he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all the observances which he supposed a regular part of the business.
on finding mrs. bennet, elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together, soon after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words, may i hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter elizabeth, when i solicit for the honour of a private audience with her in the course of this morning?
before elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise, mrs. bennet instantly answered, oh dear!
yes, certainly.
i am sure lizzy will be very happyi am sure she can have no objection.
come, kitty, i want you upstairs.
and gathering her work together, she was hastening away, when elizabeth called out, dear maam, do not go.
i beg you will not go.
mr. collins must excuse me.
he can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not hear.
i am going away myself.
no, no, nonsense, lizzy.
i desire you will stay where you are.
and upon elizabeths seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks, about to escape, she added, lizzy, i insist upon your staying and hearing mr. collins.
elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction; and a moments consideration making her also sensible that it would be wisest to get it over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again, and tried to conceal, by incessant employment, the feelings which were divided between distress and diversion.
mrs. bennet and kitty walked off, and as soon as they were gone, mr. collins began, believe me, my dear miss elizabeth, that your modesty, so far from doing you any disservice, rather adds to your other perfections.
you would have been less amiable in my eyes had there not been this little unwillingness; but allow me to assure you that i have your respected mothers permission for this address.
you can hardly doubt the purport of my discourse, however your natural delicacy may lead you to dissemble; my attentions have been too marked to be mistaken.
almost as soon as i entered the house i singled you out as the companion of my future life.
but before i am run away with by my feelings on this subject, perhaps it will be advisable for me to state my reasons for marryingand, moreover, for coming into hertfordshire with the design of selecting a wife, as i certainly did.
the idea of mr. collins, with all his solemn composure, being run away with by his feelings, made elizabeth so near laughing that she could not use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him farther, and he continued, my reasons for marrying are, first, that i think it a right thing for every clergyman in easy circumstances (like myself) to set the example of matrimony in his parish; secondly, that i am convinced it will add very greatly to my happiness; and, thirdly, which perhaps i ought to have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice and recommendation of the very noble lady whom i have the honour of calling patroness.
twice has she condescended to give me her opinion (unasked too!)
on this subject; and it was but the very saturday night before i left hunsford,between our pools at quadrille, while mrs. jenkinson was arranging miss de bourghs footstool,that she said, mr. collins, you must marry.
a clergyman like you must marry.
choose properly, choose a gentlewoman for my sake, and for your own; let her be an active, useful sort of person, not brought up high, but able to make a small income go a good way.
this is my advice.
find such a woman as soon as you can, bring her to hunsford, and i will visit her.
allow me, by the way, to observe, my fair cousin, that i do not reckon the notice and kindness of lady catherine de bourgh as among the least of the advantages in my power to offer.
you will find her manners beyond anything i can describe; and your wit and vivacity, i think, must be acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence and respect which her rank will inevitably excite.
thus much for my general intention in favour of matrimony; it remains to be told why my views were directed to longbourn instead of my own neighbourhood, where i assure you there are many amiable young women.
but the fact is, that being, as i am, to inherit this estate after the death of your honoured father (who, however, may live many years longer), i could not satisfy myself without resolving to choose a wife from among his daughters, that the loss to them might be as little as possible when the melancholy event takes placewhich, however, as i have already said, may not be for several years.
this has been my motive, my fair cousin, and i flatter myself it will not sink me in your esteem.
and now nothing remains for me but to assure you in the most animated language of the violence of my affection.
to fortune i am perfectly indifferent, and shall make no demand of that nature on your father, since i am well aware that it could not be complied with; and that one thousand pounds in the 4 per cents., which will not be yours till after your mothers decease, is all that you may ever be entitled to.
on that head, therefore, i shall be uniformly silent: and you may assure yourself that no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when we are married.
it was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now.
you are too hasty, sir, she cried.
you forget that i have made no answer.
let me do it without further loss of time.
accept my thanks for the compliment you are paying me.
i am very sensible of the honour of your proposals, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than decline them.
i am not now to learn, replied mr. collins, with a formal wave of the hand, that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of the man whom they secretly mean to accept, when he first applies for their favour; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second or even a third time.
i am, therefore, by no means discouraged by what you have just said, and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long.
upon my word, sir, cried elizabeth, your hope is rather an extraordinary one after my declaration.
i do assure you that i am not one of those young ladies (if such young ladies there are) who are so daring as to risk their happiness on the chance of being asked a second time.
i am perfectly serious in my refusal.
you could not make me happy, and i am convinced that i am the last woman in the world who would make you so.
nay, were your friend lady catherine to know me, i am persuaded she would find me in every respect ill qualified for the situation.
were it certain that lady catherine would think so, said mr. collins, very gravelybut i cannot imagine that her ladyship would at all disapprove of you.
and you may be certain that when i have the honour of seeing her again i shall speak in the highest terms of your modesty, economy, and other amiable qualifications.
indeed, mr. collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary.
you must give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the compliment of believing what i say.
i wish you very happy and very rich, and by refusing your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise.
in making me the offer, you must have satisfied the delicacy of your feelings with regard to my family, and may take possession of longbourn estate whenever it falls, without any selfreproach.
this matter may be considered, therefore, as finally settled.
and rising as she thus spoke, she would have quitted the room, had not mr. collins thus addressed her, when i do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the subject, i shall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have now given me; though i am far from accusing you of cruelty at present, because i know it to be the established custom of your sex to reject a man on the first application, and, perhaps, you have even now said as much to encourage my suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of the female character.
really, mr. collins, cried elizabeth, with some warmth, you puzzle me exceedingly.
if what i have hitherto said can appear to you in the form of encouragement, i know not how to express my refusal in such a way as may convince you of its being one.
you must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear cousin, that your refusal of my addresses are merely words of course.
my reasons for believing it are briefly these:it does not appear to me that my hand is unworthy of your acceptance, or that the establishment i can offer would be any other than highly desirable.
my situation in life, my connections with the family of de bourgh, and my relationship to your own, are circumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into further consideration that, in spite of your manifold attractions, it is by no means certain that another offer of marriage may ever be made you.
your portion is unhappily so small, that it will in all likelihood undo the effects of your loveliness and amiable qualifications.
as i must, therefore, conclude that you are not serious in your rejection of me, i shall choose to attribute it to your wish of increasing my love by suspense, according to the usual practice of elegant females.
i do assure you, sir, that i have no pretensions whatever to that kind of elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable man.
i would rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere.
i thank you again and again for the honour you have done me in your proposals, but to accept them is absolutely impossible.
my feelings in every respect forbid it.
can i speak plainer?
do not consider me now as an elegant female intending to plague you, but as a rational creature speaking the truth from her heart.
you are uniformly charming!
cried he, with an air of awkward gallantry; and i am persuaded that, when sanctioned by the express authority of both your excellent parents, my proposals will not fail of being acceptable.
to such perseverance in wilful selfdeception elizabeth would make no reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew; determined, that if he persisted in considering her repeated refusals as flattering encouragement, to apply to her father, whose negative might be uttered in such a manner as must be decisive, and whose behaviour at least could not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.
illustration chapter xx.
illustration mr. collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of his successful love; for mrs. bennet, having dawdled about in the vestibule to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw elizabeth open the door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than she entered the breakfastroom, and congratulated both him and herself in warm terms on the happy prospect of their nearer connection.
mr. collins received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and then proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview, with the result of which he trusted he had every reason to be satisfied, since the refusal which his cousin had steadfastly given him would naturally flow from her bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her character.
this information, however, startled mrs. bennet: she would have been glad to be equally satisfied that her daughter had meant to encourage him by protesting against his proposals, but she dared not believe it, and could not help saying so.
but depend upon it, mr. collins, she added, that lizzy shall be brought to reason.
i will speak to her about it myself directly.
she is a very headstrong, foolish girl, and does not know her own interest; but i will make her know it.
pardon me for interrupting you, madam, cried mr. collins; but if she is really headstrong and foolish, i know not whether she would altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation, who naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state.
if, therefore, she actually persists in rejecting my suit, perhaps it were better not to force her into accepting me, because, if liable to such defects of temper, she could not contribute much to my felicity.
sir, you quite misunderstand me, said mrs. bennet, alarmed.
lizzy is only headstrong in such matters as these.
in everything else she is as goodnatured a girl as ever lived.
i will go directly to mr. bennet, and we shall very soon settle it with her, i am sure.
she would not give him time to reply, but hurrying instantly to her husband, called out, as she entered the library, oh, mr. bennet, you are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar.
you must come and make lizzy marry mr. collins, for she vows she will not have him; and if you do not make haste he will change his mind and not have her.
mr. bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed them on her face with a calm unconcern, which was not in the least altered by her communication.
i have not the pleasure of understanding you, said he, when she had finished her speech.
of what are you talking?
of mr. collins and lizzy.
lizzy declares she will not have mr. collins, and mr. collins begins to say that he will not have lizzy.
and what am i to do on the occasion?
it seems a hopeless business.
speak to lizzy about it yourself.
tell her that you insist upon her marrying him.
let her be called down.
she shall hear my opinion.
mrs. bennet rang the bell, and miss elizabeth was summoned to the library.
come here, child, cried her father as she appeared.
i have sent for you on an affair of importance.
i understand that mr. collins has made you an offer of marriage.
is it true?
elizabeth replied that it was.
very welland this offer of marriage you have refused?
i have, sir.
very well.
we now come to the point.
your mother insists upon your accepting it.
is it not so, mrs. bennet?
yes, or i will never see her again.
an unhappy alternative is before you, elizabeth.
from this day you must be a stranger to one of your parents.
your mother will never see you again if you do not marry mr. collins, and i will never see you again if you do.
elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning; but mrs. bennet, who had persuaded herself that her husband regarded the affair as she wished, was excessively disappointed.
what do you mean, mr. bennet, by talking in this way?
you promised me to insist upon her marrying him.
my dear, replied her husband, i have two small favours to request.
first, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on the present occasion; and, secondly, of my room.
i shall be glad to have the library to myself as soon as may be.
not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her husband, did mrs. bennet give up the point.
she talked to elizabeth again and again; coaxed and threatened her by turns.
she endeavoured to secure jane in her interest, but jane, with all possible mildness, declined interfering; and elizabeth, sometimes with real earnestness, and sometimes with playful gaiety, replied to her attacks.
though her manner varied, however, her determination never did.
mr. collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed.
he thought too well of himself to comprehend on what motive his cousin could refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no other way.
his regard for her was quite imaginary; and the possibility of her deserving her mothers reproach prevented his feeling any regret.
while the family were in this confusion, charlotte lucas came to spend the day with them.
she was met in the vestibule by lydia, who, flying to her, cried in a half whisper, i am glad you are come, for there is such fun here!
what do you think has happened this morning?
mr. collins has made an offer to lizzy, and she will not have him.
illustration: they entered the breakfast room  charlotte had hardly time to answer before they were joined by kitty, who came to tell the same news; and no sooner had they entered the breakfastroom, where mrs. bennet was alone, than she likewise began on the subject, calling on miss lucas for her compassion, and entreating her to persuade her friend lizzy to comply with the wishes of her family.
pray do, my dear miss lucas, she added, in a melancholy tone; for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me; i am cruelly used, nobody feels for my poor nerves.
charlottes reply was spared by the entrance of jane and elizabeth.
ay, there she comes, continued mrs. bennet, looking as unconcerned as may be, and caring no more for us than if we were at york, provided she can have her own way.
but i tell you what, miss lizzy, if you take it into your head to go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way, you will never get a husband at alland i am sure i do not know who is to maintain you when your father is dead.
i shall not be able to keep youand so i warn you.
i have done with you from this very day.
i told you in the library, you know, that i should never speak to you again, and you will find me as good as my word.
i have no pleasure in talking to undutiful children.
not that i have much pleasure, indeed, in talking to anybody.
people who suffer as i do from nervous complaints can have no great inclination for talking.
nobody can tell what i suffer!
but it is always so.
those who do not complain are never pitied.
her daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensible that any attempt to reason with or soothe her would only increase the irritation.
she talked on, therefore, without interruption from any of them till they were joined by mr. collins, who entered with an air more stately than usual, and on perceiving whom, she said to the girls, now, i do insist upon it, that you, all of you, hold your tongues, and let mr. collins and me have a little conversation together.
elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, jane and kitty followed, but lydia stood her ground, determined to hear all she could; and charlotte, detained first by the civility of mr. collins, whose inquiries after herself and all her family were very minute, and then by a little curiosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretending not to hear.
in a doleful voice mrs. bennet thus began the projected conversation: oh, mr. collins!
my dear madam, replied he, let us be for ever silent on this point.
far be it from me, he presently continued, in a voice that marked his displeasure, to resent the behaviour of your daughter.
resignation to inevitable evils is the duty of us all: the peculiar duty of a young man who has been so fortunate as i have been, in early preferment; and, i trust, i am resigned.
perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubt of my positive happiness had my fair cousin honoured me with her hand; for i have often observed, that resignation is never so perfect as when the blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in our estimation.
you will not, i hope, consider me as showing any disrespect to your family, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions to your daughters favour, without having paid yourself and mr. bennet the compliment of requesting you to interpose your authority in my behalf.
my conduct may, i fear, be objectionable in having accepted my dismission from your daughters lips instead of your own; but we are all liable to error.
i have certainly meant well through the whole affair.
my object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with due consideration for the advantage of all your family; and if my manner has been at all reprehensible, i here beg leave to apologize.
illustration chapter xxi.
illustration the discussion of mr. collinss offer was now nearly at an end, and elizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarily attending it, and occasionally from some peevish allusion of her mother.
as for the gentleman himself, his feelings were chiefly expressed, not by embarrassment or dejection, or by trying to avoid her, but by stiffness of manner and resentful silence.
he scarcely ever spoke to her; and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible of himself were transferred for the rest of the day to miss lucas, whose civility in listening to him was a seasonable relief to them all, and especially to her friend.
the morrow produced no abatement of mrs. bennets ill humour or ill health.
mr. collins was also in the same state of angry pride.
elizabeth had hoped that his resentment might shorten his visit, but his plan did not appear in the least affected by it.
he was always to have gone on saturday, and to saturday he still meant to stay.
after breakfast, the girls walked to meryton, to inquire if mr. wickham were returned, and to lament over his absence from the netherfield ball.
he joined them on their entering the town, and attended them to their aunts, where his regret and vexation and the concern of everybody were well talked over.
to elizabeth, however, he voluntarily acknowledged that the necessity of his absence had been selfimposed.
i found, said he, as the time drew near, that i had better not meet mr. darcy;that to be in the same room, the same party with him for so many hours together, might be more than i could bear, and that scenes might arise unpleasant to more than myself.
she highly approved his forbearance; and they had leisure for a full discussion of it, and for all the commendations which they civilly bestowed on each other, as wickham and another officer walked back with them to longbourn, and during the walk he particularly attended to her.
his accompanying them was a double advantage: she felt all the compliment it offered to herself; and it was most acceptable as an occasion of introducing him to her father and mother.
illustration: walked back with them copyright 1894 by george allen.
soon after their return, a letter was delivered to miss bennet; it came from netherfield, and was opened immediately.
the envelope contained a sheet of elegant, little, hotpressed paper, well covered with a ladys fair, flowing hand; and elizabeth saw her sisters countenance change as she read it, and saw her dwelling intently on some particular passages.
jane recollected herself soon; and putting the letter away, tried to join, with her usual cheerfulness, in the general conversation: but elizabeth felt an anxiety on the subject which drew off her attention even from wickham; and no sooner had he and his companion taken leave, than a glance from jane invited her to follow her upstairs.
when they had gained their own room, jane, taking out her letter, said, this is from caroline bingley: what it contains has surprised me a good deal.
the whole party have left netherfield by this time, and are on their way to town; and without any intention of coming back again.
you shall hear what she says.
she then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the information of their having just resolved to follow their brother to town directly, and of their meaning to dine that day in grosvenor street, where mr. hurst had a house.
the next was in these words:i do not pretend to regret anything i shall leave in hertfordshire except your society, my dearest friend; but we will hope, at some future period, to enjoy many returns of that delightful intercourse we have known, and in the meanwhile may lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most unreserved correspondence.
i depend on you for that.
to these highflown expressions elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of distrust; and though the suddenness of their removal surprised her, she saw nothing in it really to lament: it was not to be supposed that their absence from netherfield would prevent mr. bingleys being there; and as to the loss of their society, she was persuaded that jane must soon cease to regard it in the enjoyment of his.
it is unlucky, said she, after a short pause, that you should not be able to see your friends before they leave the country.
but may we not hope that the period of future happiness, to which miss bingley looks forward, may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that the delightful intercourse you have known as friends will be renewed with yet greater satisfaction as sisters?
mr. bingley will not be detained in london by them.
caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return into hertfordshire this winter.
i will read it to you.
when my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business which took him to london might be concluded in three or four days; but as we are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that when charles gets to town he will be in no hurry to leave it again, we have determined on following him thither, that he may not be obliged to spend his vacant hours in a comfortless hotel.
many of my acquaintance are already there for the winter: i wish i could hear that you, my dearest friend, had any intention of making one in the crowd, but of that i despair.
i sincerely hope your christmas in hertfordshire may abound in the gaieties which that season generally brings, and that your beaux will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of the three of whom we shall deprive you.
it is evident by this, added jane, that he comes back no more this winter.
it is only evident that miss bingley does not mean he should.
why will you think so?
it must be his own doing; he is his own master.
but you do not know all.
i will read you the passage which particularly hurts me.
i will have no reserves from you.
mr. darcy is impatient to see his sister; and to confess the truth, we are scarcely less eager to meet her again.
i really do not think georgiana darcy has her equal for beauty, elegance, and accomplishments; and the affection she inspires in louisa and myself is heightened into something still more interesting from the hope we dare to entertain of her being hereafter our sister.
i do not know whether i ever before mentioned to you my feelings on this subject, but i will not leave the country without confiding them, and i trust you will not esteem them unreasonable.
my brother admires her greatly already; he will have frequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing; her relations all wish the connection as much as his own; and a sisters partiality is not misleading me, i think, when i call charles most capable of engaging any womans heart.
with all these circumstances to favour an attachment, and nothing to prevent it, am i wrong, my dearest jane, in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness of so many?
what think you of this sentence, my dear lizzy?
said jane, as she finished it.
is it not clear enough?
does it not expressly declare that caroline neither expects nor wishes me to be her sister; that she is perfectly convinced of her brothers indifference; and that if she suspects the nature of my feelings for him she means (most kindly!)
to put me on my guard.
can there be any other opinion on the subject?
yes, there can; for mine is totally different.
will you hear it?
most willingly.
you shall have it in a few words.
miss bingley sees that her brother is in love with you and wants him to marry miss darcy.
she follows him to town in the hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade you that he does not care about you.
jane shook her head.
indeed, jane, you ought to believe me.
no one who has ever seen you together can doubt his affection; miss bingley, i am sure, cannot: she is not such a simpleton.
could she have seen half as much love in mr. darcy for herself, she would have ordered her wedding clothes.
but the case is this:we are not rich enough or grand enough for them; and she is the more anxious to get miss darcy for her brother, from the notion that when there has been one intermarriage, she may have less trouble in achieving a second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, and i dare say it would succeed if miss de bourgh were out of the way.
but, my dearest jane, you cannot seriously imagine that, because miss bingley tells you her brother greatly admires miss darcy, he is in the smallest degree less sensible of your merit than when he took leave of you on tuesday; or that it will be in her power to persuade him that, instead of being in love with you, he is very much in love with her friend.
if we thought alike of miss bingley, replied jane, your representation of all this might make me quite easy.
but i know the foundation is unjust.
caroline is incapable of wilfully deceiving anyone; and all that i can hope in this case is, that she is deceived herself.
that is right.
you could not have started a more happy idea, since you will not take comfort in mine: believe her to be deceived, by all means.
you have now done your duty by her, and must fret no longer.
but, my dear sister, can i be happy, even supposing the best, in accepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing him to marry elsewhere?
you must decide for yourself, said elizabeth; and if, upon mature deliberation, you find that the misery of disobliging his two sisters is more than equivalent to the happiness of being his wife, i advise you, by all means, to refuse him.
how can you talk so?
said jane, faintly smiling; you must know, that, though i should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation, i could not hesitate.
i did not think you would; and that being the case, i cannot consider your situation with much compassion.
but if he returns no more this winter, my choice will never be required.
a thousand things may arise in six months.
the idea of his returning no more elizabeth treated with the utmost contempt.
it appeared to her merely the suggestion of carolines interested wishes; and she could not for a moment suppose that those wishes, however openly or artfully spoken, could influence a young man so totally independent of everyone.
she represented to her sister, as forcibly as possible, what she felt on the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect.
janes temper was not desponding; and she was gradually led to hope, though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope, that bingley would return to netherfield, and answer every wish of her heart.
they agreed that mrs. bennet should only hear of the departure of the family, without being alarmed on the score of the gentlemans conduct; but even this partial communication gave her a great deal of concern, and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happen to go away just as they were all getting so intimate together.
after lamenting it, however, at some length, she had the consolation of thinking that mr. bingley would be soon down again, and soon dining at longbourn; and the conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration, that, though he had been invited only to a family dinner, she would take care to have two full courses.
illustration chapter xxii.
illustration the bennets were engaged to dine with the lucases; and again, during the chief of the day, was miss lucas so kind as to listen to mr. collins.
elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her.
it keeps him in good humour, said she, and i am more obliged to you than i can express.
charlotte assured her friend of her satisfaction in being useful, and that it amply repaid her for the little sacrifice of her time.
this was very amiable; but charlottes kindness extended farther than elizabeth had any conception of:its object was nothing less than to secure her from any return of mr. collinss addresses, by engaging them towards herself.
such was miss lucass scheme; and appearances were so favourable, that when they parted at night, she would have felt almost sure of success if he had not been to leave hertfordshire so very soon.
but here she did injustice to the fire and independence of his character; for it led him to escape out of longbourn house the next morning with admirable slyness, and hasten to lucas lodge to throw himself at her feet.
he was anxious to avoid the notice of his cousins, from a conviction that, if they saw him depart, they could not fail to conjecture his design, and he was not willing to have the attempt known till its success could be known likewise; for, though feeling almost secure, and with reason, for charlotte had been tolerably encouraging, he was comparatively diffident since the adventure of wednesday.
his reception, however, was of the most flattering kind.
miss lucas perceived him from an upper window as he walked towards the house, and instantly set out to meet him accidentally in the lane.
but little had she dared to hope that so much love and eloquence awaited her there.
in as short a time as mr. collinss long speeches would allow, everything was settled between them to the satisfaction of both; and as they entered the house, he earnestly entreated her to name the day that was to make him the happiest of men; and though such a solicitation must be waived for the present, the lady felt no inclination to trifle with his happiness.
the stupidity with which he was favoured by nature must guard his courtship from any charm that could make a woman wish for its continuance; and miss lucas, who accepted him solely from the pure and disinterested desire of an establishment, cared not how soon that establishment were gained.
sir william and lady lucas were speedily applied to for their consent; and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity.
mr. collinss present circumstances made it a most eligible match for their daughter, to whom they could give little fortune; and his prospects of future wealth were exceedingly fair.
lady lucas began directly to calculate, with more interest than the matter had ever illustration: so much love and eloquence copyright 1894 by george allen.
excited before, how many years longer mr. bennet was likely to live; and sir william gave it as his decided opinion, that whenever mr. collins should be in possession of the longbourn estate, it would be highly expedient that both he and his wife should make their appearance at st. jamess.
the whole family in short were properly overjoyed on the occasion.
the younger girls formed hopes of coming out a year or two sooner than they might otherwise have done; and the boys were relieved from their apprehension of charlottes dying an old maid.
charlotte herself was tolerably composed.
she had gained her point, and had time to consider of it.
her reflections were in general satisfactory.
mr. collins, to be sure, was neither sensible nor agreeable: his society was irksome, and his attachment to her must be imaginary.
but still he would be her husband.
without thinking highly either of men or of matrimony, marriage had always been her object: it was the only honourable provision for welleducated young women of small fortune, and, however uncertain of giving happiness, must be their pleasantest preservative from want.
this preservative she had now obtained; and at the age of twentyseven, without having ever been handsome, she felt all the good luck of it.
the least agreeable circumstance in the business was the surprise it must occasion to elizabeth bennet, whose friendship she valued beyond that of any other person.
elizabeth would wonder, and probably would blame her; and though her resolution was not to be shaken, her feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation.
she resolved to give her the information herself; and therefore charged mr. collins, when he returned to longbourn to dinner, to drop no hint of what had passed before any of the family.
a promise of secrecy was of course very dutifully given, but it could not be kept without difficulty; for the curiosity excited by his long absence burst forth in such very direct questions on his return, as required some ingenuity to evade, and he was at the same time exercising great selfdenial, for he was longing to publish his prosperous love.
as he was to begin his journey too early on the morrow to see any of the family, the ceremony of leavetaking was performed when the ladies moved for the night; and mrs. bennet, with great politeness and cordiality, said how happy they should be to see him at longbourn again, whenever his other engagements might allow him to visit them.
my dear madam, he replied, this invitation is particularly gratifying, because it is what i have been hoping to receive; and you may be very certain that i shall avail myself of it as soon as possible.
they were all astonished; and mr. bennet, who could by no means wish for so speedy a return, immediately said, but is there not danger of lady catherines disapprobation here, my good sir?
you had better neglect your relations than run the risk of offending your patroness.
my dear sir, replied mr. collins, i am particularly obliged to you for this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not taking so material a step without her ladyships concurrence.
you cannot be too much on your guard.
risk anything rather than her displeasure; and if you find it likely to be raised by your coming to us again, which i should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at home, and be satisfied that we shall take no offence.
believe me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly excited by such affectionate attention; and, depend upon it, you will speedily receive from me a letter of thanks for this as well as for every other mark of your regard during my stay in hertfordshire.
as for my fair cousins, though my absence may not be long enough to render it necessary, i shall now take the liberty of wishing them health and happiness, not excepting my cousin elizabeth.
with proper civilities, the ladies then withdrew; all of them equally surprised to find that he meditated a quick return.
mrs. bennet wished to understand by it that he thought of paying his addresses to one of her younger girls, and mary might have been prevailed on to accept him.
she rated his abilities much higher than any of the others: there was a solidity in his reflections which often struck her; and though by no means so clever as herself, she thought that, if encouraged to read and improve himself by such an example as hers, he might become a very agreeable companion.
but on the following morning every hope of this kind was done away.
miss lucas called soon after breakfast, and in a private conference with elizabeth related the event of the day before.
the possibility of mr. collinss fancying himself in love with her friend had once occurred to elizabeth within the last day or two: but that charlotte could encourage him seemed almost as far from possibility as that she could encourage him herself; and her astonishment was consequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum, and she could not help crying out, engaged to mr. collins!
my dear charlotte, impossible!
the steady countenance which miss lucas had commanded in telling her story gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so direct a reproach; though, as it was no more than she expected, she soon regained her composure, and calmly replied, why should you be surprised, my dear eliza?
do you think it incredible that mr. collins should be able to procure any womans good opinion, because he was not so happy as to succeed with you?
but elizabeth had now recollected herself; and, making a strong effort for it, was able to assure her, with tolerable firmness, that the prospect of their relationship was highly grateful to her, and that she wished her all imaginable happiness.
i see what you are feeling, replied charlotte; you must be surprised, very much surprised, so lately as mr. collins was wishing to marry you.
but when you have had time to think it all over, i hope you will be satisfied with what i have done.
i am not romantic, you know.
i never was.
i ask only a comfortable home; and, considering mr. collinss character, connections, and situation in life, i am convinced that my chance of happiness with him is as fair as most people can boast on entering the marriage state.
elizabeth quietly answered undoubtedly; and, after an awkward pause, they returned to the rest of the family.
charlotte did not stay much longer; and elizabeth was then left to reflect on what she had heard.
it was a long time before she became at all reconciled to the idea of so unsuitable a match.
the strangeness of mr. collinss making two offers of marriage within three days was nothing in comparison of his being now accepted.
she had always felt that charlottes opinion of matrimony was not exactly like her own; but she could not have supposed it possible that, when called into action, she would have sacrificed every better feeling to worldly advantage.
charlotte, the wife of mr. collins, was a most humiliating picture!
and to the pang of a friend disgracing herself, and sunk in her esteem, was added the distressing conviction that it was impossible for that friend to be tolerably happy in the lot she had chosen.
illustration: protested he must be entirely mistaken.
copyright 1894 by george allen.
chapter xxiii.
illustration elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters, reflecting on what she had heard, and doubting whether she was authorized to mention it, when sir william lucas himself appeared, sent by his daughter to announce her engagement to the family.
with many compliments to them, and much selfgratulation on the prospect of a connection between the houses, he unfolded the matter,to an audience not merely wondering, but incredulous; for mrs. bennet, with more perseverance than politeness, protested he must be entirely mistaken; and lydia, always unguarded and often uncivil, boisterously exclaimed, good lord!
sir william, how can you tell such a story?
do not you know that mr. collins wants to marry lizzy?
nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have borne without anger such treatment: but sir williams goodbreeding carried him through it all; and though he begged leave to be positive as to the truth of his information, he listened to all their impertinence with the most forbearing courtesy.
elizabeth, feeling it incumbent on her to relieve him from so unpleasant a situation, now put herself forward to confirm his account, by mentioning her prior knowledge of it from charlotte herself; and endeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of her mother and sisters, by the earnestness of her congratulations to sir william, in which she was readily joined by jane, and by making a variety of remarks on the happiness that might be expected from the match, the excellent character of mr. collins, and the convenient distance of hunsford from london.
mrs. bennet was, in fact, too much overpowered to say a great deal while sir william remained; but no sooner had he left them than her feelings found a rapid vent.
in the first place, she persisted in disbelieving the whole of the matter; secondly, she was very sure that mr. collins had been taken in; thirdly, she trusted that they would never be happy together; and, fourthly, that the match might be broken off.
two inferences, however, were plainly deduced from the whole: one, that elizabeth was the real cause of all the mischief; and the other, that she herself had been barbarously used by them all; and on these two points she principally dwelt during the rest of the day.
nothing could console and nothing appease her.
nor did that day wear out her resentment.
a week elapsed before she could see elizabeth without scolding her: a month passed away before she could speak to sir william or lady lucas without being rude; and many months were gone before she could at all forgive their daughter.
mr. bennets emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion, and such as he did experience he pronounced to be of a most agreeable sort; for it gratified him, he said, to discover that charlotte lucas, whom he had been used to think tolerably sensible, was as foolish as his wife, and more foolish than his daughter!
jane confessed herself a little surprised at the match: but she said less of her astonishment than of her earnest desire for their happiness; nor could elizabeth persuade her to consider it as improbable.
kitty and lydia were far from envying miss lucas, for mr. collins was only a clergyman; and it affected them in no other way than as a piece of news to spread at meryton.
lady lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to retort on mrs. bennet the comfort of having a daughter well married; and she called at longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy she was, though mrs. bennets sour looks and illnatured remarks might have been enough to drive happiness away.
between elizabeth and charlotte there was a restraint which kept them mutually silent on the subject; and elizabeth felt persuaded that no real confidence could ever subsist between them again.
her disappointment in charlotte made her turn with fonder regard to her sister, of whose rectitude and delicacy she was sure her opinion could never be shaken, and for whose happiness she grew daily more anxious, as bingley had now been gone a week, and nothing was heard of his return.
jane had sent caroline an early answer to her letter, and was counting the days till she might reasonably hope to hear again.
the promised letter of thanks from mr. collins arrived on tuesday, addressed to their father, and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which a twelvemonths abode in the family might have prompted.
after discharging his conscience on that head, he proceeded to inform them, with many rapturous expressions, of his happiness in having obtained the affection of their amiable neighbour, miss lucas, and then explained that it was merely with the view of enjoying her society that he had been so ready to close with their kind wish of seeing him again at longbourn, whither he hoped to be able to return on monday fortnight; for lady catherine, he added, so heartily approved his marriage, that she wished it to take place as soon as possible, which he trusted would be an unanswerable argument with his amiable charlotte to name an early day for making him the happiest of men.
mr. collinss return into hertfordshire was no longer a matter of pleasure to mrs. bennet.
on the contrary, she was as much disposed to complain of it as her husband.
it was very strange that he should come to longbourn instead of to lucas lodge; it was also very inconvenient and exceedingly troublesome.
she hated having visitors in the house while her health was so indifferent, and lovers were of all people the most disagreeable.
such were the gentle murmurs of mrs. bennet, and they gave way only to the greater distress of mr. bingleys continued absence.
neither jane nor elizabeth were comfortable on this subject.
day after day passed away without bringing any other tidings of him than the report which shortly prevailed in meryton of his coming no more to netherfield the whole winter; a report which highly incensed mrs. bennet, and which she never failed to contradict as a most scandalous falsehood.
even elizabeth began to fearnot that bingley was indifferentbut that his sisters would be successful in keeping him away.
unwilling as she was to admit an idea so destructive to janes happiness, and so dishonourable to the stability of her lover, she could not prevent its frequently recurring.
the united efforts of his two unfeeling sisters, and of his overpowering friend, assisted by the attractions of miss darcy and the amusements of london, might be too much, she feared, for the strength of his attachment.
as for jane, her anxiety under this suspense was, of course, more painful than elizabeths: but whatever she felt she was desirous of concealing; and between herself and elizabeth, therefore, the subject was never alluded to.
but as no such delicacy restrained her mother, an hour seldom passed in which she did not talk of bingley, express her impatience for his arrival, or even require jane to confess that if he did not come back she should think herself very illused.
it needed all janes steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerable tranquillity.
mr. collins returned most punctually on the monday fortnight, but his reception at longbourn was not quite so gracious as it had been on his first introduction.
he was too happy, however, to need much attention; and, luckily for the others, the business of lovemaking relieved them from a great deal of his company.
the chief of every day was spent by him at lucas lodge, and he sometimes returned to longbourn only in time to make an apology for his absence before the family went to bed.
illustration: whenever she spoke in a low voice  mrs. bennet was really in a most pitiable state.
the very mention of anything concerning the match threw her into an agony of illhumour, and wherever she went she was sure of hearing it talked of.
the sight of miss lucas was odious to her.
as her successor in that house, she regarded her with jealous abhorrence.
whenever charlotte came to see them, she concluded her to be anticipating the hour of possession; and whenever she spoke in a low voice to mr. collins, was convinced that they were talking of the longbourn estate, and resolving to turn herself and her daughters out of the house as soon as mr. bennet was dead.
she complained bitterly of all this to her husband.
indeed, mr. bennet, said she, it is very hard to think that charlotte lucas should ever be mistress of this house, that i should be forced to make way for her, and live to see her take my place in it!
my dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts.
let us hope for better things.
let us flatter ourselves that i may be the survivor.
this was not very consoling to mrs. bennet; and, therefore, instead of making any answer, she went on as before.
i cannot bear to think that they should have all this estate.
if it was not for the entail, i should not mind it.
what should not you mind?
i should not mind anything at all.
let us be thankful that you are preserved from a state of such insensibility.
i never can be thankful, mr. bennet, for anything about the entail.
how anyone could have the conscience to entail away an estate from ones own daughters i cannot understand; and all for the sake of mr. collins, too!
why should he have it more than anybody else?
i leave it to yourself to determine, said mr. bennet.
illustration chapter xxiv.
illustration miss bingleys letter arrived, and put an end to doubt.
the very first sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in london for the winter, and concluded with her brothers regret at not having had time to pay his respects to his friends in hertfordshire before he left the country.
hope was over, entirely over; and when jane could attend to the rest of the letter, she found little, except the professed affection of the writer, that could give her any comfort.
miss darcys praise occupied the chief of it.
her many attractions were again dwelt on; and caroline boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ventured to predict the accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in her former letter.
she wrote also with great pleasure of her brothers being an inmate of mr. darcys house, and mentioned with raptures some plans of the latter with regard to new furniture.
elizabeth, to whom jane very soon communicated the chief of all this, heard it in silent indignation.
her heart was divided between concern for her sister and resentment against all others.
to carolines assertion of her brothers being partial to miss darcy, she paid no credit.
that he was really fond of jane, she doubted no more than she had ever done; and much as she had always been disposed to like him, she could not think without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easiness of temper, that want of proper resolution, which now made him the slave of his designing friends, and led him to sacrifice his own happiness to the caprice of their inclinations.
had his own happiness, however, been the only sacrifice, he might have been allowed to sport with it in whatever manner he thought best; but her sisters was involved in it, as she thought he must be sensible himself.
it was a subject, in short, on which reflection would be long indulged, and must be unavailing.
she could think of nothing else; and yet, whether bingleys regard had really died away, or were suppressed by his friends interference; whether he had been aware of janes attachment, or whether it had escaped his observation; whichever were the case, though her opinion of him must be materially affected by the difference, her sisters situation remained the same, her peace equally wounded.
a day or two passed before jane had courage to speak of her feelings to elizabeth; but at last, on mrs. bennets leaving them together, after a longer irritation than usual about netherfield and its master, she could not help saying, o that my dear mother had more command over herself!
she can have no idea of the pain she gives me by her continual reflections on him.
but i will not repine.
it cannot last long.
he will be forgot, and we shall all be as we were before.
elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulous solicitude, but said nothing.
you doubt me, cried jane, slightly colouring; indeed, you have no reason.
he may live in my memory as the most amiable man of my acquaintance but that is all.
i have nothing either to hope or fear, and nothing to reproach him with.
thank god i have not that pain.
a little time, thereforei shall certainly try to get the better with a stronger voice she soon added, i have this comfort immediately, that it has not been more than an error of fancy on my side, and that it has done no harm to anyone but myself.
my dear jane, exclaimed elizabeth, you are too good.
your sweetness and disinterestedness are really angelic; i do not know what to say to you.
i feel as if i had never done you justice, or loved you as you deserve.
miss bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, and threw back the praise on her sisters warm affection.
nay, said elizabeth, this is not fair.
you wish to think all the world respectable, and are hurt if i speak ill of anybody.
i only want to think you perfect, and you set yourself against it.
do not be afraid of my running into any excess, of my encroaching on your privilege of universal goodwill.
you need not.
there are few people whom i really love, and still fewer of whom i think well.
the more i see of the world the more am i dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms my belief of the inconsistency of all human characters, and of the little dependence that can be placed on the appearance of either merit or sense.
i have met with two instances lately: one i will not mention, the other is charlottes marriage.
it is unaccountable!
in every view it is unaccountable!
my dear lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these.
they will ruin your happiness.
you do not make allowance enough for difference of situation and temper.
consider mr. collinss respectability, and charlottes prudent, steady character.
remember that she is one of a large family; that as to fortune it is a most eligible match; and be ready to believe, for everybodys sake, that she may feel something like regard and esteem for our cousin.
to oblige you, i would try to believe almost anything, but no one else could be benefited by such a belief as this; for were i persuaded that charlotte had any regard for him, i should only think worse of her understanding than i now do of her heart.
my dear jane, mr. collins is a conceited, pompous, narrowminded, silly man: you know he is, as well as i do; and you must feel, as well as i do, that the woman who marries him cannot have a proper way of thinking.
you shall not defend her, though it is charlotte lucas.
you shall not, for the sake of one individual, change the meaning of principle and integrity, nor endeavour to persuade yourself or me, that selfishness is prudence, and insensibility of danger security for happiness.
i must think your language too strong in speaking of both, replied jane; and i hope you will be convinced of it, by seeing them happy together.
but enough of this.
you alluded to something else.
you mentioned two instances.
i cannot misunderstand you, but i entreat you, dear lizzy, not to pain me by thinking that person to blame, and saying your opinion of him is sunk.
we must not be so ready to fancy ourselves intentionally injured.
we must not expect a lively young man to be always so guarded and circumspect.
it is very often nothing but our own vanity that deceives us.
women fancy admiration means more than it does.
and men take care that they should.
if it is designedly done, they cannot be justified; but i have no idea of there being so much design in the world as some persons imagine.
i am far from attributing any part of mr. bingleys conduct to design, said elizabeth; but, without scheming to do wrong, or to make others unhappy, there may be error and there may be misery.
thoughtlessness, want of attention to other peoples feelings, and want of resolution, will do the business.
and do you impute it to either of those?
yes; to the last.
but if i go on i shall displease you by saying what i think of persons you esteem.
stop me, whilst you can.
you persist, then, in supposing his sisters influence him?
yes, in conjunction with his friend.
i cannot believe it.
why should they try to influence him?
they can only wish his happiness; and if he is attached to me no other woman can secure it.
your first position is false.
they may wish many things besides his happiness: they may wish his increase of wealth and consequence; they may wish him to marry a girl who has all the importance of money, great connections, and pride.
beyond a doubt they do wish him to choose miss darcy, replied jane; but this may be from better feelings than you are supposing.
they have known her much longer than they have known me; no wonder if they love her better.
but, whatever may be their own wishes, it is very unlikely they should have opposed their brothers.
what sister would think herself at liberty to do it, unless there were something very objectionable?
if they believed him attached to me they would not try to part us; if he were so, they could not succeed.
by supposing such an affection, you make everybody acting unnaturally and wrong, and me most unhappy.
do not distress me by the idea.
i am not ashamed of having been mistakenor, at least, it is slight, it is nothing in comparison of what i should feel in thinking ill of him or his sisters.
let me take it in the best light, in the light in which it may be understood.
elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from this time mr. bingleys name was scarcely ever mentioned between them.
mrs. bennet still continued to wonder and repine at his returning no more; and though a day seldom passed in which elizabeth did not account for it clearly, there seemed little chance of her ever considering it with less perplexity.
her daughter endeavoured to convince her of what she did not believe herself, that his attentions to jane had been merely the effect of a common and transient liking, which ceased when he saw her no more; but though the probability of the statement was admitted at the time, she had the same story to repeat every day.
mrs. bennets best comfort was, that mr. bingley must be down again in the summer.
mr. bennet treated the matter differently.
so, lizzy, said he, one day, your sister is crossed in love, i find.
i congratulate her.
next to being married, a girl likes to be crossed in love a little now and then.
it is something to think of, and gives her a sort of distinction among her companions.
when is your turn to come?
you will hardly bear to be long outdone by jane.
now is your time.
here are officers enough at meryton to disappoint all the young ladies in the country.
let wickham be your man.
he is a pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably.
thank you, sir, but a less agreeable man would satisfy me.
we must not all expect janes good fortune.
true, said mr. bennet; but it is a comfort to think that, whatever of that kind may befall you, you have an affectionate mother who will always make the most of it.
mr. wickhams society was of material service in dispelling the gloom which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the longbourn family.
they saw him often, and to his other recommendations was now added that of general unreserve.
the whole of what elizabeth had already heard, his claims on mr. darcy, and all that he had suffered from him, was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and everybody was pleased to think how much they had always disliked mr. darcy before they had known anything of the matter.
miss bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might be any extenuating circumstances in the case unknown to the society of hertfordshire: her mild and steady candour always pleaded for allowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes; but by everybody else mr. darcy was condemned as the worst of men.
illustration chapter xxv.
illustration after a week spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity, mr. collins was called from his amiable charlotte by the arrival of saturday.
the pain of separation, however, might be alleviated on his side by preparations for the reception of his bride, as he had reason to hope, that shortly after his next return into hertfordshire, the day would be fixed that was to make him the happiest of men.
he took leave of his relations at longbourn with as much solemnity as before; wished his fair cousins health and happiness again, and promised their father another letter of thanks.
on the following monday, mrs. bennet had the pleasure of receiving her brother and his wife, who came, as usual, to spend the christmas at longbourn.
mr. gardiner was a sensible, gentlemanlike man, greatly superior to his sister, as well by nature as education.
the netherfield ladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man who lived by trade, and within view of his own warehouses, could have been so wellbred and agreeable.
mrs. gardiner, who was several years younger than mrs. bennet and mrs. philips, was an amiable, intelligent, elegant woman, and a great favourite with her longbourn nieces.
between the two eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a very particular regard.
they had frequently been staying with her in town.
the first part of mrs. gardiners business, on her arrival, was to distribute her presents and describe the newest fashions.
when this was done, she had a less active part to play.
it became her turn to listen.
mrs. bennet had many grievances to relate, and much to complain of.
they had all been very illused since she last saw her sister.
two of her girls had been on the point of marriage, and after all there was nothing in it.
i do not blame jane, she continued, for jane would have got mr. bingley if she could.
but, lizzy!
oh, sister!
it is very hard to think that she might have been mr. collinss wife by this time, had not it been for her own perverseness.
he made her an offer in this very room, and she refused him.
the consequence of it is, that lady lucas will have a daughter married before i have, and that longbourn estate is just as much entailed as ever.
the lucases are very artful people, indeed, sister.
they are all for what they can get.
i am sorry to say it of them, but so it is.
it makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwarted so in my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselves before anybody else.
however, your coming just at this time is the greatest of comforts, and i am very glad to hear what you tell us of long sleeves.
mrs. gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had been given before, in the course of jane and elizabeths correspondence with her, made her sister a slight answer, and, in compassion to her nieces, turned the conversation.
when alone with elizabeth afterwards, she spoke more on the subject.
it seems likely to have been a desirable match for jane, said she.
i am sorry it went off.
but these things happen so often!
a young man, such as you describe mr. bingley, so easily falls in love with a pretty girl for a few weeks, and, when accident separates them, so easily forgets her, that these sort of inconstancies are very frequent.
illustration: offended two or three young ladies copyright 1894 by george allen.
an excellent consolation in its way, said elizabeth; but it will not do for us.
we do not suffer by accident.
it does not often happen that the interference of friends will persuade a young man of independent fortune to think no more of a girl whom he was violently in love with only a few days before.
but that expression of violently in love is so hackneyed, so doubtful, so indefinite, that it gives me very little idea.
it is as often applied to feelings which arise only from a half hours acquaintance, as to a real, strong attachment.
pray, how violent was mr. bingleys love?
i never saw a more promising inclination; he was growing quite inattentive to other people, and wholly engrossed by her.
every time they met, it was more decided and remarkable.
at his own ball he offended two or three young ladies by not asking them to dance; and i spoke to him twice myself without receiving an answer.
could there be finer symptoms?
is not general incivility the very essence of love?
oh, yes!
of that kind of love which i suppose him to have felt.
poor jane!
i am sorry for her, because, with her disposition, she may not get over it immediately.
it had better have happened to you, lizzy; you would have laughed yourself out of it sooner.
but do you think she would be prevailed on to go back with us?
change of scene might be of serviceand perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful as anything.
elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt persuaded of her sisters ready acquiescence.
i hope, added mrs. gardiner, that no consideration with regard to this young man will influence her.
we live in so different a part of town, all our connections are so different, and, as you well know, we go out so little, that it is very improbable they should meet at all, unless he really comes to see her.
and that is quite impossible; for he is now in the custody of his friend, and mr. darcy would no more suffer him to call on jane in such a part of london!
my dear aunt, how could you think of it?
mr. darcy may, perhaps, have heard of such a place as gracechurch street, but he would hardly think a months ablution enough to cleanse him from its impurities, were he once to enter it; and, depend upon it, mr. bingley never stirs without him.
so much the better.
i hope they will not meet at all.
but does not jane correspond with his sister?
she will not be able to help calling.
she will drop the acquaintance entirely.
but, in spite of the certainty in which elizabeth affected to place this point, as well as the still more interesting one of bingleys being withheld from seeing jane, she felt a solicitude on the subject which convinced her, on examination, that she did not consider it entirely hopeless.
it was possible, and sometimes she thought it probable, that his affection might be reanimated, and the influence of his friends successfully combated by the more natural influence of janes attractions.
miss bennet accepted her aunts invitation with pleasure; and the bingleys were no otherwise in her thoughts at the same time than as she hoped, by carolines not living in the same house with her brother, she might occasionally spend a morning with her, without any danger of seeing him.
the gardiners stayed a week at longbourn; and what with the philipses, the lucases, and the officers, there was not a day without its engagement.
mrs. bennet had so carefully provided for the entertainment of her brother and sister, that they did not once sit down to a family dinner.
when the engagement was for home, some of the officers always made part of it, of which officers mr. wickham was sure to be one; and on these occasions mrs. gardiner, rendered suspicious by elizabeths warm commendation of him, narrowly observed them both.
without supposing them, from what she saw, to be very seriously in love, their preference of each other was plain enough to make her a little uneasy; and she resolved to speak to elizabeth on the subject before she left hertfordshire, and represent to her the imprudence of encouraging such an attachment.
to mrs. gardiner, wickham had one means of affording pleasure, unconnected with his general powers.
about ten or a dozen years ago, before her marriage, she had spent a considerable time in that very part of derbyshire to which he belonged.
they had, therefore, many acquaintance in common; and, though wickham had been little there since the death of darcys father, five years before, it was yet in his power to give her fresher intelligence of her former friends than she had been in the way of procuring.
mrs. gardiner had seen pemberley, and known the late mr. darcy by character perfectly well.
here, consequently, was an inexhaustible subject of discourse.
in comparing her recollection of pemberley with the minute description which wickham could give, and in bestowing her tribute of praise on the character of its late possessor, she was delighting both him and herself.
on being made acquainted with the present mr. darcys treatment of him, she tried to remember something of that gentlemans reputed disposition, when quite a lad, which might agree with it; and was confident, at last, that she recollected having heard mr. fitzwilliam darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud, illnatured boy.
illustration: will you come and see me?
chapter xxvi.
illustration mrs. gardiners caution to elizabeth was punctually and kindly given on the first favourable opportunity of speaking to her alone: after honestly telling her what she thought, she thus went on: you are too sensible a girl, lizzy, to fall in love merely because you are warned against it; and, therefore, i am not afraid of speaking openly.
seriously, i would have you be on your guard.
do not involve yourself, or endeavour to involve him, in an affection which the want of fortune would make so very imprudent.
i have nothing to say against him: he is a most interesting young man; and if he had the fortune he ought to have, i should think you could not do better.
but as it isyou must not let your fancy run away with you.
you have sense, and we all expect you to use it.
your father would depend on your resolution and good conduct, i am sure.
you must not disappoint your father.
my dear aunt, this is being serious indeed.
yes, and i hope to engage you to be serious likewise.
well, then, you need not be under any alarm.
i will take care of myself, and of mr. wickham too.
he shall not be in love with me, if i can prevent it.
elizabeth, you are not serious now.
i beg your pardon.
i will try again.
at present i am not in love with mr. wickham; no, i certainly am not.
but he is, beyond all comparison, the most agreeable man i ever sawand if he becomes really attached to mei believe it will be better that he should not.
i see the imprudence of it.
oh, that abominable mr. darcy!
my fathers opinion of me does me the greatest honour; and i should be miserable to forfeit it.
my father, however, is partial to mr. wickham.
in short, my dear aunt, i should be very sorry to be the means of making any of you unhappy; but since we see, every day, that where there is affection young people are seldom withheld, by immediate want of fortune, from entering into engagements with each other, how can i promise to be wiser than so many of my fellowcreatures, if i am tempted, or how am i even to know that it would be wiser to resist?
all that i can promise you, therefore, is not to be in a hurry.
i will not be in a hurry to believe myself his first object.
when i am in company with him, i will not be wishing.
in short, i will do my best.
perhaps it will be as well if you discourage his coming here so very often.
at least you should not remind your mother of inviting him.
as i did the other day, said elizabeth, with a conscious smile; very true, it will be wise in me to refrain from that.
but do not imagine that he is always here so often.
it is on your account that he has been so frequently invited this week.
you know my mothers ideas as to the necessity of constant company for her friends.
but really, and upon my honour, i will try to do what i think to be wisest; and now i hope you are satisfied.
her aunt assured her that she was; and elizabeth, having thanked her for the kindness of her hints, they parted,a wonderful instance of advice being given on such a point without being resented.
mr. collins returned into hertfordshire soon after it had been quitted by the gardiners and jane; but, as he took up his abode with the lucases, his arrival was no great inconvenience to mrs. bennet.
his marriage was now fast approaching; and she was at length so far resigned as to think it inevitable, and even repeatedly to say, in an illnatured tone, that she wished they might be happy.
thursday was to be the weddingday, and on wednesday miss lucas paid her farewell visit; and when she rose to take leave, elizabeth, ashamed of her mothers ungracious and reluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected herself, accompanied her out of the room.
as they went down stairs together, charlotte said, i shall depend on hearing from you very often, eliza.
that you certainly shall.
and i have another favour to ask.
will you come and see me?
we shall often meet, i hope, in hertfordshire.
i am not likely to leave kent for some time.
promise me, therefore, to come to hunsford.
elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in the visit.
my father and maria are to come to me in march, added charlotte, and i hope you will consent to be of the party.
indeed, eliza, you will be as welcome to me as either of them.
the wedding took place: the bride and bridegroom set off for kent from the church door, and everybody had as much to say or to hear on the subject as usual.
elizabeth soon heard from her friend, and their correspondence was as regular and frequent as it ever had been: that it should be equally unreserved was impossible.
elizabeth could never address her without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over; and, though determined not to slacken as a correspondent, it was for the sake of what had been rather than what was.
charlottes first letters were received with a good deal of eagerness: there could not but be curiosity to know how she would speak of her new home, how she would like lady catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to be; though, when the letters were read, elizabeth felt that charlotte expressed herself on every point exactly as she might have foreseen.
she wrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with comforts, and mentioned nothing which she could not praise.
the house, furniture, neighbourhood, and roads, were all to her taste, and lady catherines behaviour was most friendly and obliging.
it was mr. collinss picture of hunsford and rosings rationally softened; and elizabeth perceived that she must wait for her own visit there, to know the rest.
jane had already written a few lines to her sister, to announce their safe arrival in london; and when she wrote again, elizabeth hoped it would be in her power to say something of the bingleys.
her impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatience generally is.
jane had been a week in town, without either seeing or hearing from caroline.
she accounted for it, however, by supposing that her last letter to her friend from longbourn had by some accident been lost.
my aunt, she continued, is going tomorrow into that part of the town, and i shall take the opportunity of calling in grosvenor street.
she wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen miss bingley.
i did not think caroline in spirits, were her words, but she was very glad to see me, and reproached me for giving her no notice of my coming to london.
i was right, therefore; my last letter had never reached her.
i inquired after their brother, of course.
he was well, but so much engaged with mr. darcy that they scarcely ever saw him.
i found that miss darcy was expected to dinner: i wish i could see her.
my visit was not long, as caroline and mrs. hurst were going out.
i dare say i shall soon see them here.
elizabeth shook her head over this letter.
it convinced her that accident only could discover to mr. bingley her sisters being in town.
four weeks passed away, and jane saw nothing of him.
she endeavoured to persuade herself that she did not regret it; but she could no longer be blind to miss bingleys inattention.
after waiting at home every morning for a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her, the visitor did at last appear; but the shortness of her stay, and, yet more, the alteration of her manner, would allow jane to deceive herself no longer.
the letter which she wrote on this occasion to her sister will prove what she felt: my dearest lizzy will, i am sure, be incapable of triumphing in her better judgment, at my expense, when i confess myself to have been entirely deceived in miss bingleys regard for me.
but, my dear sister, though the event has proved you right, do not think me obstinate if i still assert that, considering what her behaviour was, my confidence was as natural as your suspicion.
i do not at all comprehend her reason for wishing to be intimate with me; but, if the same circumstances were to happen again, i am sure i should be deceived again.
caroline did not return my visit till yesterday; and not a note, not a line, did i receive in the meantime.
when she did come, it was very evident that she had no pleasure in it; she made a slight, formal apology for not calling before, said not a word of wishing to see me again, and was, in every respect, so altered a creature, that when she went away i was perfectly resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer.
i pity, though i cannot help blaming, her.
she was very wrong in singling me out as she did; i can safely say, that every advance to intimacy began on her side.
but i pity her, because she must feel that she has been acting wrong, and because i am very sure that anxiety for her brother is the cause of it.
i need not explain myself farther; and though we know this anxiety to be quite needless, yet if she feels it, it will easily account for her behaviour to me; and so deservedly dear as he is to his sister, whatever anxiety she may feel on his behalf is natural and amiable.
i cannot but wonder, however, at her having any such fears now, because if he had at all cared about me, we must have met long, long ago.
he knows of my being in town, i am certain, from something she said herself; and yet it would seem, by her manner of talking, as if she wanted to persuade herself that he is really partial to miss darcy.
i cannot understand it.
if i were not afraid of judging harshly, i should be almost tempted to say, that there is a strong appearance of duplicity in all this.
i will endeavour to banish every painful thought, and think only of what will make me happy, your affection, and the invariable kindness of my dear uncle and aunt.
let me hear from you very soon.
miss bingley said something of his never returning to netherfield again, of giving up the house, but not with any certainty.
we had better not mention it.
i am extremely glad that you have such pleasant accounts from our friends at hunsford.
pray go to see them, with sir william and maria.
i am sure you will be very comfortable there.
yours, etc.
this letter gave elizabeth some pain; but her spirits returned, as she considered that jane would no longer be duped, by the sister at least.
all expectation from the brother was now absolutely over.
she would not even wish for any renewal of his attentions.
his character sunk on every review of it; and, as a punishment for him, as well as a possible advantage to jane, she seriously hoped he might really soon marry mr. darcys sister, as, by wickhams account, she would make him abundantly regret what he had thrown away.
mrs. gardiner about this time reminded elizabeth of her promise concerning that gentleman, and required information; and elizabeth had such to send as might rather give contentment to her aunt than to herself.
his apparent partiality had subsided, his attentions were over, he was the admirer of some one else.
elizabeth was watchful enough to see it all, but she could see it and write of it without material pain.
her heart had been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfied with believing that she would have been his only choice, had fortune permitted it.
the sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the most remarkable charm of the young lady to whom he was now rendering himself agreeable; but elizabeth, less clearsighted perhaps in this case than in charlottes, did not quarrel with him for his wish of independence.
nothing, on the contrary, could be more natural; and, while able to suppose that it cost him a few struggles to relinquish her, she was ready to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both, and could very sincerely wish him happy.
all this was acknowledged to mrs. gardiner; and, after relating the circumstances, she thus went on:i am now convinced, my dear aunt, that i have never been much in love; for had i really experienced that pure and elevating passion, i should at present detest his very name, and wish him all manner of evil.
but my feelings are not only cordial towards him, they are even impartial towards miss king.
i cannot find out that i hate her at all, or that i am in the least unwilling to think her a very good sort of girl.
there can be no love in all this.
my watchfulness has been effectual; and though i should certainly be a more interesting object to all my acquaintance, were i distractedly in love with him, i cannot say that i regret my comparative insignificance.
importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly.
kitty and lydia take his defection much more to heart than i do.
they are young in the ways of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that handsome young men must have something to live on as well as the plain.
illustration: on the stairs  chapter xxvii.
illustration with no greater events than these in the longbourn family, and otherwise diversified by little beyond the walks to meryton, sometimes dirty and sometimes cold, did january and february pass away.
march was to take elizabeth to hunsford.
she had not at first thought very seriously of going thither; but charlotte, she soon found, was depending on the plan, and she gradually learned to consider it herself with greater pleasure as well as greater certainty.
absence had increased her desire of seeing charlotte again, and weakened her disgust of mr. collins.
there was novelty in the scheme; and as, with such a mother and such uncompanionable sisters, home could not be faultless, a little change was not unwelcome for its own sake.
the journey would, moreover, give her a peep at jane; and, in short, as the time drew near, she would have been very sorry for any delay.
everything, however, went on smoothly, and was finally settled according to charlottes first sketch.
she was to accompany sir william and his second daughter.
the improvement of spending a night in london was added in time, and the plan became as perfect as plan could be.
the only pain was in leaving her father, who would certainly miss her, and who, when it came to the point, so little liked her going, that he told her to write to him, and almost promised to answer her letter.
the farewell between herself and mr. wickham was perfectly friendly; on his side even more.
his present pursuit could not make him forget that elizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve his attention, the first to listen and to pity, the first to be admired; and in his manner of bidding her adieu, wishing her every enjoyment, reminding her of what she was to expect in lady catherine de bourgh, and trusting their opinion of hertheir opinion of everybodywould always coincide, there was a solicitude, an interest, which she felt must ever attach her to him with a most sincere regard; and she parted from him convinced, that, whether married or single, he must always be her model of the amiable and pleasing.
her fellowtravellers the next day were not of a kind to make her think him less agreeable.
sir william lucas, and his daughter maria, a goodhumoured girl, but as emptyheaded as himself, had nothing to say that could be worth hearing, and were listened to with about as much delight as the rattle of the chaise.
elizabeth loved absurdities, but she had known sir williams too long.
he could tell her nothing new of the wonders of his presentation and knighthood; and his civilities were worn out, like his information.
it was a journey of only twentyfour miles, and they began it so early as to be in gracechurch street by noon.
as they drove to mr. gardiners door, jane was at a drawingroom window watching their arrival: when they entered the passage, she was there to welcome them, and elizabeth, looking earnestly in her face, was pleased to see it healthful and lovely as ever.
on the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls, whose eagerness for their cousins appearance would not allow them to wait in the drawingroom, and whose shyness, as they had not seen her for a twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower.
all was joy and kindness.
the day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle and shopping, and the evening at one of the theatres.
elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt.
their first subject was her sister; and she was more grieved than astonished to hear, in reply to her minute inquiries, that though jane always struggled to support her spirits, there were periods of dejection.
it was reasonable, however, to hope that they would not continue long.
mrs. gardiner gave her the particulars also of miss bingleys visit in gracechurch street, and repeated conversations occurring at different times between jane and herself, which proved that the former had, from her heart, given up the acquaintance.
mrs. gardiner then rallied her niece on wickhams desertion, and complimented her on bearing it so well.
but, my dear elizabeth, she added, what sort of girl is miss king?
i should be sorry to think our friend mercenary.
pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matrimonial affairs, between the mercenary and the prudent motive?
where does discretion end, and avarice begin?
last christmas you were afraid of his marrying me, because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is trying to get a girl with only ten thousand pounds, you want to find out that he is mercenary.
if you will only tell me what sort of girl miss king is, i shall know what to think.
she is a very good kind of girl, i believe.
i know no harm of her.
but he paid her not the smallest attention till her grandfathers death made her mistress of this fortune?
nowhy should he?
if it were not allowable for him to gain my affections, because i had no money, what occasion could there be for making love to a girl whom he did not care about, and who was equally poor?
but there seems indelicacy in directing his attentions towards her so soon after this event.
a man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those elegant decorums which other people may observe.
if she does not object to it, why should we?
her not objecting does not justify him.
it only shows her being deficient in something herselfsense or feeling.
well, cried elizabeth, have it as you choose.
he shall be mercenary, and she shall be foolish.
no, lizzy, that is what i do not choose.
i should be sorry, you know, to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in derbyshire.
oh, if that is all, i have a very poor opinion of young men who live in derbyshire; and their intimate friends who live in hertfordshire are not much better.
i am sick of them all.
thank heaven!
i am going tomorrow where i shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality, who has neither manners nor sense to recommend him.
stupid men are the only ones worth knowing, after all.
take care, lizzy; that speech savours strongly of disappointment.
before they were separated by the conclusion of the play, she had the unexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany her uncle and aunt in a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the summer.
we have not quite determined how far it shall carry us, said mrs. gardiner; but perhaps, to the lakes.
no scheme could have been more agreeable to elizabeth, and her acceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful.
my dear, dear aunt, she rapturously cried, what delight!
what felicity!
you give me fresh life and vigour.
adieu to disappointment and spleen.
what are men to rocks and mountains?
oh, what hours of transport we shall spend!
and when we do return, it shall not be like other travellers, without being able to give one accurate idea of anything.
we will know where we have gonewe will recollect what we have seen.
lakes, mountains, and rivers, shall not be jumbled together in our imaginations; nor, when we attempt to describe any particular scene, will we begin quarrelling about its relative situation.
let our first effusions be less insupportable than those of the generality of travellers.
illustration: at the door  chapter xxviii.
illustration every object in the next days journey was new and interesting to elizabeth; and her spirits were in a state of enjoyment; for she had seen her sister looking so well as to banish all fear for her health, and the prospect of her northern tour was a constant source of delight.
when they left the high road for the lane to hunsford, every eye was in search of the parsonage, and every turning expected to bring it in view.
the paling of rosings park was their boundary on one side.
elizabeth smiled at the recollection of all that she had heard of its inhabitants.
at length the parsonage was discernible.
the garden sloping to the road, the house standing in it, the green pales and the laurel hedge, everything declared they were arriving.
mr. collins and charlotte appeared at the door, and the carriage stopped at the small gate, which led by a short gravel walk to the house, amidst the nods and smiles of the whole party.
in a moment they were all out of the chaise, rejoicing at the sight of each other.
mrs. collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest pleasure, and elizabeth was more and more satisfied with coming, when she found herself so affectionately received.
she saw instantly that her cousins manners were not altered by his marriage: his formal civility was just what it had been; and he detained her some minutes at the gate to hear and satisfy his inquiries after all her family.
they were then, with no other delay than his pointing out the neatness of the entrance, taken into the house; and as soon as they were in the parlour, he welcomed them a second time, with ostentatious formality, to his humble abode, and punctually repeated all his wifes offers of refreshment.
elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory; and she could not help fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room, its aspect, and its furniture, he addressed himself particularly to her, as if wishing to make her feel what she had lost in refusing him.
but though everything seemed neat and comfortable, she was not able to gratify him by any sigh of repentance; and rather looked with wonder at her friend, that she could have so cheerful an air with such a companion.
when mr. collins said anything of which his wife might reasonably be ashamed, which certainly was not seldom, she involuntarily turned her eye on charlotte.
once or twice she could discern a faint blush; but in general charlotte wisely did not hear.
after sitting long enough to admire every article of furniture in the room, from the sideboard to the fender, to give an account of their journey, and of all that had happened in london, mr. collins invited them to take a stroll in the garden, which was large and well laid out, and to the cultivation of which he attended himself.
to work in his garden was one of his most respectable pleasures; and elizabeth admired the command of countenance with which charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise, and owned she encouraged it as much as possible.
here, leading the way through every walk and cross walk, and scarcely allowing them an interval to utter the praises he asked for, every view was pointed out with a minuteness which left beauty entirely behind.
he could number the fields in every direction, and could tell how many trees there were in the most distant clump.
but of all the views which his garden, or which the country or the kingdom could boast, none were to be compared with the prospect of rosings, afforded by an opening in the trees that bordered the park nearly opposite the front of his house.
it was a handsome modern building, well situated on rising ground.
from his garden, mr. collins would have led them round his two meadows; but the ladies, not having shoes to encounter the remains of a white frost, turned back; and while sir william accompanied him, charlotte took her sister and friend over the house, extremely well pleased, probably, to have the opportunity of showing it without her husbands help.
it was rather small, but well built and convenient; and everything was fitted up and arranged with a neatness and consistency, of which elizabeth gave charlotte all the credit.
when mr. collins could be forgotten, there was really a great air of comfort throughout, and by charlottes evident enjoyment of it, elizabeth supposed he must be often forgotten.
she had already learnt that lady catherine was still in the country.
it was spoken of again while they were at dinner, when mr. collins joining in, observed, yes, miss elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing lady catherine de bourgh on the ensuing sunday at church, and i need not say you will be delighted with her.
she is all affability and condescension, and i doubt not but you will be honoured with some portion of her notice when service is over.
i have scarcely any hesitation in saying that she will include you and my sister maria in every invitation with which she honours us during your stay here.
her behaviour to my dear charlotte is charming.
we dine at rosings twice every week, and are never allowed to walk home.
her ladyships carriage is regularly ordered for us.
i should say, one of her ladyships carriages, for she has several.
lady catherine is a very respectable, sensible woman, indeed, added charlotte, and a most attentive neighbour.
very true, my dear, that is exactly what i say.
she is the sort of woman whom one cannot regard with too much deference.
the evening was spent chiefly in talking over hertfordshire news, and telling again what had been already written; and when it closed, elizabeth, in the solitude of her chamber, had to meditate upon charlottes degree of contentment, to understand her address in guiding, and composure in bearing with, her husband, and to acknowledge that it was all done very well.
she had also to anticipate how her visit would pass, the quiet tenour of their usual employments, the vexatious interruptions of mr. collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse with rosings.
a lively imagination soon settled it all.
about the middle of the next day, as she was in her room getting ready for a walk, a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole house in confusion; and, after listening a moment, she heard somebody running upstairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly after her.
she opened the door, and met maria in the landingplace, who, breathless with agitation, cried out, illustration: in conversation with the ladies copyright 1894 by george allen.
oh, my dear eliza!
pray make haste and come into the diningroom, for there is such a sight to be seen!
i will not tell you what it is.
make haste, and come down this moment.
elizabeth asked questions in vain; maria would tell her nothing more; and down they ran into the diningroom which fronted the lane, in quest of this wonder; it was two ladies, stopping in a low phaeton at the garden gate.
and is this all?
cried elizabeth.
i expected at least that the pigs were got into the garden, and here is nothing but lady catherine and her daughter!
la!
my dear, said maria, quite shocked at the mistake, it is not lady catherine.
the old lady is mrs. jenkinson, who lives with them.
the other is miss de bourgh.
only look at her.
she is quite a little creature.
who would have thought she could be so thin and small!
she is abominably rude to keep charlotte out of doors in all this wind.
why does she not come in?
oh, charlotte says she hardly ever does.
it is the greatest of favours when miss de bourgh comes in.
i like her appearance, said elizabeth, struck with other ideas.
she looks sickly and cross.
yes, she will do for him very well.
she will make him a very proper wife.
mr. collins and charlotte were both standing at the gate in conversation with the ladies; and sir william, to elizabeths high diversion, was stationed in the doorway, in earnest contemplation of the greatness before him, and constantly bowing whenever miss de bourgh looked that way.
at length there was nothing more to be said; the ladies drove on, and the others returned into the house.
mr. collins no sooner saw the two girls than he began to congratulate them on their good fortune, which charlotte explained by letting them know that the whole party was asked to dine at rosings the next day.
illustration: lady catherine, said she, you have given me a treasure.
copyright 1894 by george allen.
chapter xxix.
illustration mr. collinss triumph, in consequence of this invitation, was complete.
the power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his wondering visitors, and of letting them see her civility towards himself and his wife, was exactly what he had wished for; and that an opportunity of doing it should be given so soon was such an instance of lady catherines condescension as he knew not how to admire enough.
i confess, said he, that i should not have been at all surprised by her ladyships asking us on sunday to drink tea and spend the evening at rosings.
i rather expected, from my knowledge of her affability, that it would happen.
but who could have foreseen such an attention as this?
who could have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine there (an invitation, moreover, including the whole party) so immediately after your arrival?
i am the less surprised at what has happened, replied sir william, from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are, which my situation in life has allowed me to acquire.
about the court, such instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon.
scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but their visit to rosings.
mr. collins was carefully instructing them in what they were to expect, that the sight of such rooms, so many servants, and so splendid a dinner, might not wholly overpower them.
when the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to elizabeth, do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel.
lady catherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us which becomes herself and daughter.
i would advise you merely to put on whatever of your clothes is superior to the restthere is no occasion for anything more.
lady catherine will not think the worse of you for being simply dressed.
she likes to have the distinction of rank preserved.
while they were dressing, he came two or three times to their different doors, to recommend their being quick, as lady catherine very much objected to be kept waiting for her dinner.
such formidable accounts of her ladyship, and her manner of living, quite frightened maria lucas, who had been little used to company; and she looked forward to her introduction at rosings with as much apprehension as her father had done to his presentation at st. jamess.
as the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about half a mile across the park.
every park has its beauty and its prospects; and elizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though she could not be in such raptures as mr. collins expected the scene to inspire, and was but slightly affected by his enumeration of the windows in front of the house, and his relation of what the glazing altogether had originally cost sir lewis de bourgh.
when they ascended the steps to the hall, marias alarm was every moment increasing, and even sir william did not look perfectly calm.
elizabeths courage did not fail her.
she had heard nothing of lady catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents or miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money and rank she thought she could witness without trepidation.
from the entrance hall, of which mr. collins pointed out, with a rapturous air, the fine proportion and finished ornaments, they followed the servants through an antechamber to the room where lady catherine, her daughter, and mrs. jenkinson were sitting.
her ladyship, with great condescension, arose to receive them; and as mrs. collins had settled it with her husband that the office of introduction should be hers, it was performed in a proper manner, without any of those apologies and thanks which he would have thought necessary.
in spite of having been at st. jamess, sir william was so completely awed by the grandeur surrounding him, that he had but just courage enough to make a very low bow, and take his seat without saying a word; and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on the edge of her chair, not knowing which way to look.
elizabeth found herself quite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before her composedly.
lady catherine was a tall, large woman, with stronglymarked features, which might once have been handsome.
her air was not conciliating, nor was her manner of receiving them such as to make her visitors forget their inferior rank.
she was not rendered formidable by silence: but whatever she said was spoken in so authoritative a tone as marked her selfimportance, and brought mr. wickham immediately to elizabeths mind; and, from the observation of the day altogether, she believed lady catherine to be exactly what he had represented.
when, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportment she soon found some resemblance of mr. darcy, she turned her eyes on the daughter, she could almost have joined in marias astonishment at her being so thin and so small.
there was neither in figure nor face any likeness between the ladies.
miss de bourgh was pale and sickly: her features, though not plain, were insignificant; and she spoke very little, except in a low voice, to mrs. jenkinson, in whose appearance there was nothing remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening to what she said, and placing a screen in the proper direction before her eyes.
after sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one of the windows to admire the view, mr. collins attending them to point out its beauties, and lady catherine kindly informing them that it was much better worth looking at in the summer.
the dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the servants, and all the articles of plate which mr. collins had promised; and, as he had likewise foretold, he took his seat at the bottom of the table, by her ladyships desire, and looked as if he felt that life could furnish nothing greater.
he carved and ate and praised with delighted alacrity; and every dish was commended first by him, and then by sir william, who was now enough recovered to echo whatever his soninlaw said, in a manner which elizabeth wondered lady catherine could bear.
but lady catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, and gave most gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the table proved a novelty to them.
the party did not supply much conversation.
elizabeth was ready to speak whenever there was an opening, but she was seated between charlotte and miss de bourghthe former of whom was engaged in listening to lady catherine, and the latter said not a word to her all the dinnertime.
mrs. jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how little miss de bourgh ate, pressing her to try some other dish and fearing she was indisposed.
maria thought speaking out of the question, and the gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire.
when the ladies returned to the drawingroom, there was little to be done but to hear lady catherine talk, which she did without any intermission till coffee came in, delivering her opinion on every subject in so decisive a manner as proved that she was not used to have her judgment controverted.
she inquired into charlottes domestic concerns familiarly and minutely, and gave her a great deal of advice as to the management of them all; told her how everything ought to be regulated in so small a family as hers, and instructed her as to the care of her cows and her poultry.
elizabeth found that nothing was beneath this great ladys attention which could furnish her with an occasion for dictating to others.
in the intervals of her discourse with mrs. collins, she addressed a variety of questions to maria and elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections she knew the least, and who, she observed to mrs. collins, was a very genteel, pretty kind of girl.
she asked her at different times how many sisters she had, whether they were older or younger than herself, whether any of them were likely to be married, whether they were handsome, where they had been educated, what carriage her father kept, and what had been her mothers maiden name?
elizabeth felt all the impertinence of her questions, but answered them very composedly.
lady catherine then observed, your fathers estate is entailed on mr. collins, i think?
for your sake, turning to charlotte, i am glad of it; but otherwise i see no occasion for entailing estates from the female line.
it was not thought necessary in sir lewis de bourghs family.
do you play and sing, miss bennet?
a little.
oh thensome time or other we shall be happy to hear you.
our instrument is a capital one, probably superior to  you shall try it some day.
do your sisters play and sing?
one of them does.
why did not you all learn?
you ought all to have learned.
the miss webbs all play, and their father has not so good an income as yours.
do you draw?
no, not at all.
what, none of you?
not one.
that is very strange.
but i suppose you had no opportunity.
your mother should have taken you to town every spring for the benefit of masters.
my mother would have no objection, but my father hates london.
has your governess left you?
we never had any governess.
no governess!
how was that possible?
five daughters brought up at home without a governess!
i never heard of such a thing.
your mother must have been quite a slave to your education.
elizabeth could hardly help smiling, as she assured her that had not been the case.
then who taught you?
who attended to you?
without a governess, you must have been neglected.
compared with some families, i believe we were; but such of us as wished to learn never wanted the means.
we were always encouraged to read, and had all the masters that were necessary.
those who chose to be idle certainly might.
ay, no doubt: but that is what a governess will prevent; and if i had known your mother, i should have advised her most strenuously to engage one.
i always say that nothing is to be done in education without steady and regular instruction, and nobody but a governess can give it.
it is wonderful how many families i have been the means of supplying in that way.
i am always glad to get a young person well placed out.
four nieces of mrs. jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means; and it was but the other day that i recommended another young person, who was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are quite delighted with her.
mrs. collins, did i tell you of lady metcalfes calling yesterday to thank me?
she finds miss pope a treasure.
lady catherine, said she, you have given me a treasure.
are any of your younger sisters out, miss bennet?
yes, maam, all.
all!
what, all five out at once?
very odd!
and you only the second.
the younger ones out before the elder are married!
your younger sisters must be very young?
yes, my youngest is not sixteen.
perhaps she is full young to be much in company.
but really, maam, i think it would be very hard upon younger sisters that they should not have their share of society and amusement, because the elder may not have the means or inclination to marry early.
the last born has as good a right to the pleasures of youth as the first.
and to be kept back on such a motive!
i think it would not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind.
upon my word, said her ladyship, you give your opinion very decidedly for so young a person.
pray, what is your age?
with three younger sisters grown up, replied elizabeth, smiling, your ladyship can hardly expect me to own it.
lady catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer; and elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had ever dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence.
you cannot be more than twenty, i am sure,therefore you need not conceal your age.
i am not oneandtwenty.
when the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was over, the card tables were placed.
lady catherine, sir william, and mr. and mrs. collins sat down to quadrille; and as miss de bourgh chose to play at cassino, the two girls had the honour of assisting mrs. jenkinson to make up her party.
their table was superlatively stupid.
scarcely a syllable was uttered that did not relate to the game, except when mrs. jenkinson expressed her fears of miss de bourghs being too hot or too cold, or having too much or too little light.
a great deal more passed at the other table.
lady catherine was generally speakingstating the mistakes of the three others, or relating some anecdote of herself.
mr. collins was employed in agreeing to everything her ladyship said, thanking her for every fish he won, and apologizing if he thought he won too many.
sir william did not say much.
he was storing his memory with anecdotes and noble names.
when lady catherine and her daughter had played as long as they chose, the tables were broken up, the carriage was offered to mrs. collins, gratefully accepted, and immediately ordered.
the party then gathered round the fire to hear lady catherine determine what weather they were to have on the morrow.
from these instructions they were summoned by the arrival of the coach; and with many speeches of thankfulness on mr. collinss side, and as many bows on sir williams, they departed.
as soon as they had driven from the door, elizabeth was called on by her cousin to give her opinion of all that she had seen at rosings, which, for charlottes sake, she made more favourable than it really was.
but her commendation, though costing her some trouble, could by no means satisfy mr. collins, and he was very soon obliged to take her ladyships praise into his own hands.
illustration chapter xxx.
illustration sir william stayed only a week at hunsford; but his visit was long enough to convince him of his daughters being most comfortably settled, and of her possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were not often met with.
while sir william was with them, mr. collins devoted his mornings to driving him out in his gig, and showing him the country: but when he went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments, and elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of her cousin by the alteration; for the chief of the time between breakfast and dinner was now passed by him either at work in the garden, or in reading and writing, and looking out of window in his own book room, which fronted the road.
the room in which the ladies sat was backwards.
elizabeth at first had rather wondered that charlotte should not prefer the dining parlour for common use; it was a better sized room, and had a pleasanter aspect: but she soon saw that her friend had an excellent reason for what she did, for mr. collins would undoubtedly have been much less in his own apartment had they sat in one equally lively; and she gave charlotte credit for the arrangement.
from the drawingroom they could distinguish nothing in the lane, and were indebted to mr. collins for the knowledge of what carriages went along, and how often especially miss de bourgh drove by in her phaeton, which he never failed coming to inform them of, though it happened almost every day.
she not unfrequently stopped at the parsonage, and had a few minutes conversation with charlotte, but was scarcely ever prevailed on to get out.
very few days passed in which mr. collins did not walk to rosings, and not many in which his wife did not think it necessary to go likewise; and till elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livings to be disposed of, she could not understand the sacrifice of so many hours.
now and then they were honoured with a call from her ladyship, and nothing escaped her observation that was passing in the room during these visits.
she examined into their employments, looked at their work, and advised them to do it differently; found fault with the arrangement of the furniture, or detected the housemaid in negligence; and if she accepted any refreshment, seemed to do it only for the sake of finding out that mrs. collinss joints of meat were too large for her family.
elizabeth soon perceived, that though this great lady was not in the commission of the peace for the county, she was a most active magistrate in her own parish, the minutest concerns of which were carried to her by mr. collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to be quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, she sallied forth into the village to settle their differences, silence their complaints, and scold them into harmony and plenty.
illustration: he never failed to inform them  the entertainment of dining at rosings was repeated about twice a week; and, allowing for the loss of sir william, and there being only one cardtable in the evening, every such entertainment was the counterpart of the first.
their other engagements were few, as the style of living of the neighbourhood in general was beyond the collinses reach.
this, however, was no evil to elizabeth, and upon the whole she spent her time comfortably enough: there were half hours of pleasant conversation with charlotte, and the weather was so fine for the time of year, that she had often great enjoyment out of doors.
her favourite walk, and where she frequently went while the others were calling on lady catherine, was along the open grove which edged that side of the park, where there was a nice sheltered path, which no one seemed to value but herself, and where she felt beyond the reach of lady catherines curiosity.
in this quiet way the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away.
easter was approaching, and the week preceding it was to bring an addition to the family at rosings, which in so small a circle must be important.
elizabeth had heard, soon after her arrival, that mr. darcy was expected there in the course of a few weeks; and though there were not many of her acquaintance whom she did not prefer, his coming would furnish one comparatively new to look at in their rosings parties, and she might be amused in seeing how hopeless miss bingleys designs on him were, by his behaviour to his cousin, for whom he was evidently destined by lady catherine, who talked of his coming with the greatest satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration, and seemed almost angry to find that he had already been frequently seen by miss lucas and herself.
his arrival was soon known at the parsonage; for mr. collins was walking the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into hunsford lane, in order to have illustration: the gentlemen accompanied him.
copyright 1894 by george allen.
the earliest assurance of it; and, after making his bow as the carriage turned into the park, hurried home with the great intelligence.
on the following morning he hastened to rosings to pay his respects.
there were two nephews of lady catherine to require them, for mr. darcy had brought with him a colonel fitzwilliam, the younger son of his uncle, lord ; and, to the great surprise of all the party, when mr. collins returned, the gentlemen accompanied him.
charlotte had seen them from her husbands room, crossing the road, and immediately running into the other, told the girls what an honour they might expect, adding, i may thank you, eliza, for this piece of civility.
mr. darcy would never have come so soon to wait upon me.
elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment before their approach was announced by the doorbell, and shortly afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room.
colonel fitzwilliam, who led the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in person and address most truly the gentleman.
mr. darcy looked just as he had been used to look in hertfordshire, paid his compliments, with his usual reserve, to mrs. collins; and whatever might be his feelings towards her friend, met her with every appearance of composure.
elizabeth merely courtesied to him, without saying a word.
colonel fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly, with the readiness and ease of a wellbred man, and talked very pleasantly; but his cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house and garden to mrs. collins, sat for some time without speaking to anybody.
at length, however, his civility was so far awakened as to inquire of elizabeth after the health of her family.
she answered him in the usual way; and, after a moments pause, added, my eldest sister has been in town these three months.
have you never happened to see her there?
she was perfectly sensible that he never had: but she wished to see whether he would betray any consciousness of what had passed between the bingleys and jane; and she thought he looked a little confused as he answered that he had never been so fortunate as to meet miss bennet.
the subject was pursued no further, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went away.
illustration: at church  chapter xxxi.
illustration colonel fitzwilliams manners were very much admired at the parsonage, and the ladies all felt that he must add considerably to the pleasure of their engagements at rosings.
it was some days, however, before they received any invitation thither, for while there were visitors in the house they could not be necessary; and it was not till easterday, almost a week after the gentlemens arrival, that they were honoured by such an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church to come there in the evening.
for the last week they had seen very little of either lady catherine or her daughter.
colonel fitzwilliam had called at the parsonage more than once during the time, but mr. darcy they had only seen at church.
the invitation was accepted, of course, and at a proper hour they joined the party in lady catherines drawingroom.
her ladyship received them civilly, but it was plain that their company was by no means so acceptable as when she could get nobody else; and she was, in fact, almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them, especially to darcy, much more than to any other person in the room.
colonel fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them: anything was a welcome relief to him at rosings; and mrs. collinss pretty friend had, moreover, caught his fancy very much.
he now seated himself by her, and talked so agreeably of kent and hertfordshire, of travelling and staying at home, of new books and music, that elizabeth had never been half so well entertained in that room before; and they conversed with so much spirit and flow as to draw the attention of lady catherine herself, as well as of mr. darcy.
his eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned towards them with a look of curiosity; and that her ladyship, after a while, shared the feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for she did not scruple to call out, what is that you are saying, fitzwilliam?
what is it you are talking of?
what are you telling miss bennet?
let me hear what it is.
we were talking of music, madam, said he, when no longer able to avoid a reply.
of music!
then pray speak aloud.
it is of all subjects my delight.
i must have my share in the conversation, if you are speaking of music.
there are few people in england, i suppose, who have more true enjoyment of music than myself, or a better natural taste.
if i had ever learnt, i should have been a great proficient.
and so would anne, if her health had allowed her to apply.
i am confident that she would have performed delightfully.
how does georgiana get on, darcy?
mr. darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sisters proficiency.
i am very glad to hear such a good account of her, said lady catherine; and pray tell her from me, that she cannot expect to excel, if she does not practise a great deal.
i assure you, madam, he replied, that she does not need such advice.
she practises very constantly.
so much the better.
it cannot be done too much; and when i next write to her, i shall charge her not to neglect it on any account.
i often tell young ladies, that no excellence in music is to be acquired without constant practice.
i have told miss bennet several times, that she will never play really well, unless she practises more; and though mrs. collins has no instrument, she is very welcome, as i have often told her, to come to rosings every day, and play on the pianoforte in mrs. jenkinsons room.
she would be in nobodys way, you know, in that part of the house.
mr. darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunts illbreeding, and made no answer.
when coffee was over, colonel fitzwilliam reminded elizabeth of having promised to play to him; and she sat down directly to the instrument.
he drew a chair near her.
lady catherine listened to half a song, and then talked, as before, to her other nephew; till the latter walked away from her, and moving with his usual deliberation towards the pianoforte, stationed himself so as to command a full view of the fair performers countenance.
elizabeth saw what he was doing, and at the first convenient pause turned to him with an arch smile, and said, you mean to frighten me, mr. darcy, by coming in all this state to hear me.
but i will not be alarmed, though your sister does play so well.
there is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to be frightened at the will of others.
my courage always rises with every attempt to intimidate me.
i shall not say that you are mistaken, he replied, because you could not really believe me to entertain any design of alarming you; and i have had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know, that you find great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which, in fact, are not your own.
elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself, and said to colonel fitzwilliam, your cousin will give you a very pretty notion of me, and teach you not to believe a word i say.
i am particularly unlucky in meeting with a person so well able to expose my real character, in a part of the world where i had hoped to pass myself off with some degree of credit.
indeed, mr. darcy, it is very ungenerous in you to mention all that you knew to my disadvantage in hertfordshireand, give me leave to say, very impolitic toofor it is provoking me to retaliate, and such things may come out as will shock your relations to hear.
i am not afraid of you, said he, smilingly.
pray let me hear what you have to accuse him of, cried colonel fitzwilliam.
i should like to know how he behaves among strangers.
you shall hear, thenbut prepare for something very dreadful.
the first time of my ever seeing him in hertfordshire, you must know, was at a balland at this ball, what do you think he did?
he danced only four dances!
i am sorry to pain you, but so it was.
he danced only four dances, though gentlemen were scarce; and, to my certain knowledge, more than one young lady was sitting down in want of a partner.
mr. darcy, you cannot deny the fact.
i had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady in the assembly beyond my own party.
true; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ballroom.
well, colonel fitzwilliam, what do i play next?
my fingers wait your orders.
perhaps, said darcy, i should have judged better had i sought an introduction, but i am illqualified to recommend myself to strangers.
shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?
said elizabeth, still addressing colonel fitzwilliam.
shall we ask him why a man of sense and education, and who has lived in the world, is illqualified to recommend himself to strangers?
i can answer your question, said fitzwilliam, without applying to him.
it is because he will not give himself the trouble.
i certainly have not the talent which some people possess, said darcy, of conversing easily with those i have never seen before.
i cannot catch their tone of conversation, or appear interested in their concerns, as i often see done.
my fingers, said elizabeth, do not move over this instrument in the masterly manner which i see so many womens do.
they have not the same force or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression.
but then i have always supposed it to be my own faultbecause i would not take the trouble of practising.
it is not that i do not believe my fingers as capable as any other womans of superior execution.
darcy smiled and said, you are perfectly right.
you have employed your time much better.
no one admitted to the privilege of hearing you can think anything wanting.
we neither of us perform to strangers.
here they were interrupted by lady catherine, who called out to know what they were talking of.
elizabeth immediately began playing again.
lady catherine approached, and, after listening for a few minutes, said to darcy, miss bennet would not play at all amiss if she practised more, and could have the advantage of a london master.
she has a very good notion of fingering, though her taste is not equal to annes.
anne would have been a delightful performer, had her health allowed her to learn.
elizabeth looked at darcy, to see how cordially he assented to his cousins praise: but neither at that moment nor at any other could she discern any symptom of love; and from the whole of his behaviour to miss de bourgh she derived this comfort for miss bingley, that he might have been just as likely to marry her, had she been his relation.
lady catherine continued her remarks on elizabeths performance, mixing with them many instructions on execution and taste.
elizabeth received them with all the forbearance of civility; and at the request of the gentlemen remained at the instrument till her ladyships carriage was ready to take them all home.
illustration chapter xxxii.
illustration elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to jane, while mrs. collins and maria were gone on business into the village, when she was startled by a ring at the door, the certain signal of a visitor.
as she had heard no carriage, she thought it not unlikely to be lady catherine; and under that apprehension was putting away her halffinished letter, that she might escape all impertinent questions, when the door opened, and to her very great surprise mr. darcy, and mr. darcy only, entered the room.
he seemed astonished too on finding her alone, and apologized for his intrusion, by letting her know that he had understood all the ladies to be within.
they then sat down, and when her inquiries after rosings were made, seemed in danger of sinking into total silence.
it was absolutely necessary, therefore, to think of something; and in this emergency recollecting when she had seen him last in hertfordshire, and feeling curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hasty departure, she observed, how very suddenly you all quitted netherfield last november, mr. darcy!
it must have been a most agreeable surprise to mr. bingley to see you all after him so soon; for, if i recollect right, he went but the day before.
he and his sisters were well, i hope, when you left london?
perfectly so, i thank you.
she found that she was to receive no other answer; and, after a short pause, added, i think i have understood that mr. bingley has not much idea of ever returning to netherfield again?
i have never heard him say so; but it is probable that he may spend very little of his time there in future.
he has many friends, and he is at a time of life when friends and engagements are continually increasing.
if he means to be but little at netherfield, it would be better for the neighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely, for then we might possibly get a settled family there.
but, perhaps, mr. bingley did not take the house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as for his own, and we must expect him to keep or quit it on the same principle.
i should not be surprised, said darcy, if he were to give it up as soon as any eligible purchase offers.
elizabeth made no answer.
she was afraid of talking longer of his friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the trouble of finding a subject to him.
he took the hint and soon began with, this seems a very comfortable house.
lady catherine, i believe, did a great deal to it when mr. collins first came to hunsford.
i believe she didand i am sure she could not have bestowed her kindness on a more grateful object.
mr. collins appears very fortunate in his choice of a wife.
yes, indeed; his friends may well rejoice in his having met with one of the very few sensible women who would have accepted him, or have made him happy if they had.
my friend has an excellent understandingthough i am not certain that i consider her marrying mr. collins as the wisest thing she ever did.
she seems perfectly happy, however; and, in a prudential light, it is certainly a very good match for her.
it must be very agreeable to her to be settled within so easy a distance of her own family and friends.
an easy distance do you call it?
it is nearly fifty miles.
and what is fifty miles of good road?
little more than half a days journey.
yes, i call it a very easy distance.
i should never have considered the distance as one of the advantages of the match, cried elizabeth.
i should never have said mrs. collins was settled near her family.
it is a proof of your own attachment to hertfordshire.
anything beyond the very neighbourhood of longbourn, i suppose, would appear far.
as he spoke there was a sort of smile, which elizabeth fancied she understood; he must be supposing her to be thinking of jane and netherfield, and she blushed as she answered, i do not mean to say that a woman may not be settled too near her family.
the far and the near must be relative, and depend on many varying circumstances.
where there is fortune to make the expense of travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil.
but that is not the case here.
mr. and mrs. collins have a comfortable income, but not such a one as will allow of frequent journeysand i am persuaded my friend would not call herself near her family under less than half the present distance.
mr. darcy drew his chair a little towards her, and said, you cannot have a right to such very strong local attachment.
you cannot have been always at longbourn.
elizabeth looked surprised.
the gentleman experienced some change of feeling; he drew back his chair, took a newspaper from the table, and, glancing over it, said, in a colder voice, are you pleased with kent?
a short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued, on either side calm and conciseand soon put an end to by the entrance of charlotte and her sister, just returned from their walk.
the ttette surprised them.
mr. darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his intruding on miss bennet, and, after sitting a few minutes longer, without saying much to anybody, went away.
illustration: accompanied by their aunt copyright 1894 by george allen.
what can be the meaning of this?
said charlotte, as soon as he was gone.
my dear eliza, he must be in love with you, or he would never have called on us in this familiar way.
but when elizabeth told of his silence, it did not seem very likely, even to charlottes wishes, to be the case; and, after various conjectures, they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed from the difficulty of finding anything to do, which was the more probable from the time of year.
all field sports were over.
within doors there was lady catherine, books, and a billiard table, but gentlemen cannot be always within doors; and in the nearness of the parsonage, or the pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived in it, the two cousins found a temptation from this period of walking thither almost every day.
they called at various times of the morning, sometimes separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their aunt.
it was plain to them all that colonel fitzwilliam came because he had pleasure in their society, a persuasion which of course recommended him still more; and elizabeth was reminded by her own satisfaction in being with him, as well as by his evident admiration, of her former favourite, george wickham; and though, in comparing them, she saw there was less captivating softness in colonel fitzwilliams manners, she believed he might have the best informed mind.
but why mr. darcy came so often to the parsonage it was more difficult to understand.
it could not be for society, as he frequently sat there ten minutes together without opening his lips; and when he did speak, it seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choicea sacrifice to propriety, not a pleasure to himself.
he seldom appeared really animated.
mrs. collins knew not what to make of him.
colonel fitzwilliams occasionally laughing at his stupidity proved that he was generally different, which her own knowledge of him could not have told her; and as she would have liked to believe this change the effect of love, and the object of that love her friend eliza, she set herself seriously to work to find it out: she watched him whenever they were at rosings, and whenever he came to hunsford; but without much success.
he certainly looked at her friend a great deal, but the expression of that look was disputable.
it was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she often doubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it seemed nothing but absence of mind.
she had once or twice suggested to elizabeth the possibility of his being partial to her, but elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and mrs. collins did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger of raising expectations which might only end in disappointment; for in her opinion it admitted not of a doubt, that all her friends dislike would vanish, if she could suppose him to be in her power.
in her kind schemes for elizabeth, she sometimes planned her marrying colonel fitzwilliam.
he was, beyond comparison, the pleasantest man: he certainly admired her, and his situation in life was most eligible; but, to counterbalance these advantages, mr. darcy had considerable patronage in the church, and his cousin could have none at all.
illustration: on looking up chapter xxxiii.
illustration more than once did elizabeth, in her ramble within the park, unexpectedly meet mr. darcy.
she felt all the perverseness of the mischance that should bring him where no one else was brought; and, to prevent its ever happening again, took care to inform him, at first, that it was a favourite haunt of hers.
how it could occur a second time, therefore, was very odd!
yet it did, and even the third.
it seemed like wilful illnature, or a voluntary penance; for on these occasions it was not merely a few formal inquiries and an awkward pause and then away, but he actually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with her.
he never said a great deal, nor did she give herself the trouble of talking or of listening much; but it struck her in the course of their third encounter that he was asking some odd unconnected questionsabout her pleasure in being at hunsford, her love of solitary walks, and her opinion of mr. and mrs. collinss happiness; and that in speaking of rosings, and her not perfectly understanding the house, he seemed to expect that whenever she came into kent again she would be staying there too.
his words seemed to imply it.
could he have colonel fitzwilliam in his thoughts?
she supposed, if he meant anything, he must mean an allusion to what might arise in that quarter.
it distressed her a little, and she was quite glad to find herself at the gate in the pales opposite the parsonage.
she was engaged one day, as she walked, in reperusing janes last letter, and dwelling on some passages which proved that jane had not written in spirits, when, instead of being again surprised by mr. darcy, she saw, on looking up, that colonel fitzwilliam was meeting her.
putting away the letter immediately, and forcing a smile, she said, i did not know before that you ever walked this way.
i have been making the tour of the park, he replied, as i generally do every year, and intended to close it with a call at the parsonage.
are you going much farther?
no, i should have turned in a moment.
and accordingly she did turn, and they walked towards the parsonage together.
do you certainly leave kent on saturday?
said she.
yesif darcy does not put it off again.
but i am at his disposal.
he arranges the business just as he pleases.
and if not able to please himself in the arrangement, he has at least great pleasure in the power of choice.
i do not know anybody who seems more to enjoy the power of doing what he likes than mr. darcy.
he likes to have his own way very well, replied colonel fitzwilliam.
but so we all do.
it is only that he has better means of having it than many others, because he is rich, and many others are poor.
i speak feelingly.
a younger son, you know, must be inured to selfdenial and dependence.
in my opinion, the younger son of an earl can know very little of either.
now, seriously, what have you ever known of selfdenial and dependence?
when have you been prevented by want of money from going wherever you chose or procuring anything you had a fancy for?
these are home questionsand perhaps i cannot say that i have experienced many hardships of that nature.
but in matters of greater weight, i may suffer from the want of money.
younger sons cannot marry where they like.
unless where they like women of fortune, which i think they very often do.
our habits of expense make us too dependent, and there are not many in my rank of life who can afford to marry without some attention to money.
is this, thought elizabeth, meant for me?
and she coloured at the idea; but, recovering herself, said in a lively tone, and pray, what is the usual price of an earls younger son?
unless the elder brother is very sickly, i suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pounds.
he answered her in the same style, and the subject dropped.
to interrupt a silence which might make him fancy her affected with what had passed, she soon afterwards said, i imagine your cousin brought you down with him chiefly for the sake of having somebody at his disposal.
i wonder he does not marry, to secure a lasting convenience of that kind.
but, perhaps, his sister does as well for the present; and, as she is under his sole care, he may do what he likes with her.
no, said colonel fitzwilliam, that is an advantage which he must divide with me.
i am joined with him in the guardianship of miss darcy.
are you, indeed?
and pray what sort of a guardian do you make?
does your charge give you much trouble?
young ladies of her age are sometimes a little difficult to manage; and if she has the true darcy spirit, she may like to have her own way.
as she spoke, she observed him looking at her earnestly; and the manner in which he immediately asked her why she supposed miss darcy likely to give them any uneasiness, convinced her that she had somehow or other got pretty near the truth.
she directly replied, you need not be frightened.
i never heard any harm of her; and i dare say she is one of the most tractable creatures in the world.
she is a very great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance, mrs. hurst and miss bingley.
i think i have heard you say that you know them.
i know them a little.
their brother is a pleasant, gentlemanlike manhe is a great friend of darcys.
oh yes, said elizabeth drilymr.
darcy is uncommonly kind to mr. bingley, and takes a prodigious deal of care of him.
care of him!
yes, i really believe darcy does take care of him in those points where he most wants care.
from something that he told me in our journey hither, i have reason to think bingley very much indebted to him.
but i ought to beg his pardon, for i have no right to suppose that bingley was the person meant.
it was all conjecture.
what is it you mean?
it is a circumstance which darcy of course could not wish to be generally known, because if it were to get round to the ladys family it would be an unpleasant thing.
you may depend upon my not mentioning it.
and remember that i have not much reason for supposing it to be bingley.
what he told me was merely this: that he congratulated himself on having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a most imprudent marriage, but without mentioning names or any other particulars; and i only suspected it to be bingley from believing him the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort, and from knowing them to have been together the whole of last summer.
did mr. darcy give you his reasons for this interference?
i understood that there were some very strong objections against the lady.
and what arts did he use to separate them?
he did not talk to me of his own arts, said fitzwilliam, smiling.
he only told me what i have now told you.
elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart swelling with indignation.
after watching her a little, fitzwilliam asked her why she was so thoughtful.
i am thinking of what you have been telling me, said she.
your cousins conduct does not suit my feelings.
why was he to be the judge?
you are rather disposed to call his interference officious?
i do not see what right mr. darcy had to decide on the propriety of his friends inclination; or why, upon his own judgment alone, he was to determine and direct in what manner that friend was to be happy.
but, she continued, recollecting herself, as we know none of the particulars, it is not fair to condemn him.
it is not to be supposed that there was much affection in the case.
that is not an unnatural surmise, said fitzwilliam; but it is lessening the honour of my cousins triumph very sadly.
this was spoken jestingly, but it appeared to her so just a picture of mr. darcy, that she would not trust herself with an answer; and, therefore, abruptly changing the conversation, talked on indifferent matters till they reached the parsonage.
there, shut into her own room, as soon as their visitor left them, she could think without interruption of all that she had heard.
it was not to be supposed that any other people could be meant than those with whom she was connected.
there could not exist in the world two men over whom mr. darcy could have such boundless influence.
that he had been concerned in the measures taken to separate mr. bingley and jane, she had never doubted; but she had always attributed to miss bingley the principal design and arrangement of them.
if his own vanity, however, did not mislead him, he was the causehis pride and caprice were the causeof all that jane had suffered, and still continued to suffer.
he had ruined for a while every hope of happiness for the most affectionate, generous heart in the world; and no one could say how lasting an evil he might have inflicted.
there were some very strong objections against the lady, were colonel fitzwilliams words; and these strong objections probably were, her having one uncle who was a country attorney, and another who was in business in london.
to jane herself, she exclaimed, there could be no possibility of objection,all loveliness and goodness as she is!
her understanding excellent, her mind improved, and her manners captivating.
neither could anything be urged against my father, who, though with some peculiarities, has abilities which mr. darcy himself need not disdain, and respectability which he will probably never reach.
when she thought of her mother, indeed, her confidence gave way a little; but she would not allow that any objections there had material weight with mr. darcy, whose pride, she was convinced, would receive a deeper wound from the want of importance in his friends connections than from their want of sense; and she was quite decided, at last, that he had been partly governed by this worst kind of pride, and partly by the wish of retaining mr. bingley for his sister.
the agitation and tears which the subject occasioned brought on a headache; and it grew so much worse towards the evening that, added to her unwillingness to see mr. darcy, it determined her not to attend her cousins to rosings, where they were engaged to drink tea.
mrs. collins, seeing that she was really unwell, did not press her to go, and as much as possible prevented her husband from pressing her; but mr. collins could not conceal his apprehension of lady catherines being rather displeased by her staying at home.
illustration chapter xxxiv.
illustration when they were gone, elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate herself as much as possible against mr. darcy, chose for her employment the examination of all the letters which jane had written to her since her being in kent.
they contained no actual complaint, nor was there any revival of past occurrences, or any communication of present suffering.
but in all, and in almost every line of each, there was a want of that cheerfulness which had been used to characterize her style, and which, proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself, and kindly disposed towards everyone, had been scarcely ever clouded.
elizabeth noticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with an attention which it had hardly received on the first perusal.
mr. darcys shameful boast of what misery he had been able to inflict gave her a keener sense of her sisters sufferings.
it was some consolation to think that his visit to rosings was to end on the day after the next, and a still greater that in less than a fortnight she should herself be with jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery of her spirits, by all that affection could do.
she could not think of darcys leaving kent without remembering that his cousin was to go with him; but colonel fitzwilliam had made it clear that he had no intentions at all, and, agreeable as he was, she did not mean to be unhappy about him.
while settling this point, she was suddenly roused by the sound of the doorbell; and her spirits were a little fluttered by the idea of its being colonel fitzwilliam himself, who had once before called late in the evening, and might now come to inquire particularly after her.
but this idea was soon banished, and her spirits were very differently affected, when, to her utter amazement, she saw mr. darcy walk into the room.
in a hurried manner he immediately began an inquiry after her health, imputing his visit to a wish of hearing that she were better.
she answered him with cold civility.
he sat down for a few moments, and then getting up walked about the room.
elizabeth was surprised, but said not a word.
after a silence of several minutes, he came towards her in an agitated manner, and thus began: in vain have i struggled.
it will not do.
my feelings will not be repressed.
you must allow me to tell you how ardently i admire and love you.
elizabeths astonishment was beyond expression.
she stared, coloured, doubted, and was silent.
this he considered sufficient encouragement, and the avowal of all that he felt and had long felt for her immediately followed.
he spoke well; but there were feelings besides those of the heart to be detailed, and he was not more eloquent on the subject of tenderness than of pride.
his sense of her inferiority, of its being a degradation, of the family obstacles which judgment had always opposed to inclination, were dwelt on with a warmth which seemed due to the consequence he was wounding, but was very unlikely to recommend his suit.
in spite of her deeplyrooted dislike, she could not be insensible to the compliment of such a mans affection, and though her intentions did not vary for an instant, she was at first sorry for the pain he was to receive; till roused to resentment by his subsequent language, she lost all compassion in anger.
she tried, however, to compose herself to answer him with patience, when he should have done.
he concluded with representing to her the strength of that attachment which in spite of all his endeavours he had found impossible to conquer; and with expressing his hope that it would now be rewarded by her acceptance of his hand.
as he said this she could easily see that he had no doubt of a favourable answer.
he spoke of apprehension and anxiety, but his countenance expressed real security.
such a circumstance could only exasperate farther; and when he ceased the colour rose into her cheeks and she said, in such cases as this, it is, i believe, the established mode to express a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed, however unequally they may be returned.
it is natural that obligation should be felt, and if i could feel gratitude, i would now thank you.
but i cannoti have never desired your good opinion, and you have certainly bestowed it most unwillingly.
i am sorry to have occasioned pain to anyone.
it has been most unconsciously done, however, and i hope will be of short duration.
the feelings which you tell me have long prevented the acknowledgment of your regard can have little difficulty in overcoming it after this explanation.
mr. darcy, who was leaning against the mantelpiece with his eyes fixed on her face, seemed to catch her words with no less resentment than surprise.
his complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbance of his mind was visible in every feature.
he was struggling for the appearance of composure, and would not open his lips till he believed himself to have attained it.
the pause was to elizabeths feelings dreadful.
at length, in a voice of forced calmness, he said, and this is all the reply which i am to have the honour of expecting!
i might, perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so little endeavour at civility, i am thus rejected.
but it is of small importance.
i might as well inquire, replied she, why, with so evident a design of offending and insulting me, you chose to tell me that you liked me against your will, against your reason, and even against your character?
was not this some excuse for incivility, if i was uncivil?
but i have other provocations.
you know i have.
had not my own feelings decided against you, had they been indifferent, or had they even been favourable, do you think that any consideration would tempt me to accept the man who has been the means of ruining, perhaps for ever, the happiness of a most beloved sister?
as she pronounced these words, mr. darcy changed colour; but the emotion was short, and he listened without attempting to interrupt her while she continued, i have every reason in the world to think ill of you.
no motive can excuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted there.
you dare not, you cannot deny that you have been the principal, if not the only means of dividing them from each other, of exposing one to the censure of the world for caprice and instability, the other to its derision for disappointed hopes, and involving them both in misery of the acutest kind.
she paused, and saw with no slight indignation that he was listening with an air which proved him wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse.
he even looked at her with a smile of affected incredulity.
can you deny that you have done it?
she repeated.
with assumed tranquillity he then replied, i have no wish of denying that i did everything in my power to separate my friend from your sister, or that i rejoice in my success.
towards him i have been kinder than towards myself.
elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil reflection, but its meaning did not escape, nor was it likely to conciliate her.
but it is not merely this affair, she continued, on which my dislike is founded.
long before it had taken place, my opinion of you was decided.
your character was unfolded in the recital which i received many months ago from mr. wickham.
on this subject, what can you have to say?
in what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself?
or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon others?
you take an eager interest in that gentlemans concerns, said darcy, in a less tranquil tone, and with a heightened colour.
who that knows what his misfortunes have been can help feeling an interest in him?
his misfortunes!
repeated darcy, contemptuously,yes, his misfortunes have been great indeed.
and of your infliction, cried elizabeth, with energy; you have reduced him to his present state of povertycomparative poverty.
you have withheld the advantages which you must know to have been designed for him.
you have deprived the best years of his life of that independence which was no less his due than his desert.
you have done all this!
and yet you can treat the mention of his misfortunes with contempt and ridicule.
and this, cried darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the room, is your opinion of me!
this is the estimation in which you hold me!
i thank you for explaining it so fully.
my faults, according to this calculation, are heavy indeed!
but, perhaps, added he, stopping in his walk, and turning towards her, these offences might have been overlooked, had not your pride been hurt by my honest confession of the scruples that had long prevented my forming any serious design.
these bitter accusations might have been suppressed, had i, with greater policy, concealed my struggles, and flattered you into the belief of my being impelled by unqualified, unalloyed inclination; by reason, by reflection, by everything.
but disguise of every sort is my abhorrence.
nor am i ashamed of the feelings i related.
they were natural and just.
could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of your connections?to congratulate myself on the hope of relations whose condition in life is so decidedly beneath my own?
elizabeth felt herself growing more angry every moment; yet she tried to the utmost to speak with composure when she said, you are mistaken, mr. darcy, if you suppose that the mode of your declaration affected me in any other way than as it spared me the concern which i might have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner.
she saw him start at this; but he said nothing, and she continued, you could not have made me the offer of your hand in any possible way that would have tempted me to accept it.
again his astonishment was obvious; and he looked at her with an expression of mingled incredulity and mortification.
she went on, from the very beginning, from the first moment, i may almost say, of my acquaintance with you, your manners impressing me with the fullest belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain of the feelings of others, were such as to form that groundwork of disapprobation, on which succeeding events have built so immovable a dislike; and i had not known you a month before i felt that you were the last man in the world whom i could ever be prevailed on to marry.
you have said quite enough, madam.
i perfectly comprehend your feelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have been.
forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my best wishes for your health and happiness.
and with these words he hastily left the room, and elizabeth heard him the next moment open the front door and quit the house.
the tumult of her mind was now painfully great.
she knew not how to support herself, and, from actual weakness, sat down and cried for half an hour.
her astonishment, as she reflected on what had passed, was increased by every review of it.
that she should receive an offer of marriage from mr. darcy!
that he should have been in love with her for so many months!
so much in love as to wish to marry her in spite of all the objections which had made him prevent his friends marrying her sister, and which must appear at least with equal force in his own case, was almost incredible!
it was gratifying to have inspired unconsciously so strong an affection.
but his pride, his abominable pride, his shameless avowal of what he had done with respect to jane, his unpardonable assurance in acknowledging, though he could not justify it, and the unfeeling manner which he had mentioned mr. wickham, his cruelty towards whom he had not attempted to deny, soon overcame the pity which the consideration of his attachment had for a moment excited.
she continued in very agitating reflections till the sound of lady catherines carriage made her feel how unequal she was to encounter charlottes observation, and hurried her away to her room.
illustration: hearing herself called  chapter xxxv.
illustration elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditations which had at length closed her eyes.
she could not yet recover from the surprise of what had happened: it was impossible to think of anything else; and, totally indisposed for employment, she resolved soon after breakfast to indulge herself in air and exercise.
she was proceeding directly to her favourite walk, when the recollection of mr. darcys sometimes coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park, she turned up the lane which led her farther from the turnpike road.
the park paling was still the boundary on one side, and she soon passed one of the gates into the ground.
after walking two or three times along that part of the lane, she was tempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gates and look into the park.
the five weeks which she had now passed in kent had made a great difference in the country, and every day was adding to the verdure of the early trees.
she was on the point of continuing her walk, when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove which edged the park: he was moving that way; and fearful of its being mr. darcy, she was directly retreating.
but the person who advanced was now near enough to see her, and stepping forward with eagerness, pronounced her name.
she had turned away; but on hearing herself called, though in a voice which proved it to be mr. darcy, she moved again towards the gate.
he had by that time reached it also; and, holding out a letter, which she instinctively took, said, with a look of haughty composure, i have been walking in the grove some time, in the hope of meeting you.
will you do me the honour of reading that letter?
and then, with a slight bow, turned again into the plantation, and was soon out of sight.
with no expectation of pleasure, but with the strongest curiosity, elizabeth opened the letter, and to her still increasing wonder, perceived an envelope containing two sheets of letter paper, written quite through, in a very close hand.
the envelope itself was likewise full.
pursuing her way along the lane, she then began it.
it was dated from rosings, at eight oclock in the morning, and was as follows: be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by the apprehension of its containing any repetition of those sentiments, or renewal of those offers, which were last night so disgusting to you.
i write without any intention of paining you, or humbling myself, by dwelling on wishes, which, for the happiness of both, cannot be too soon forgotten; and the effort which the formation and the perusal of this letter must occasion, should have been spared, had not my character required it to be written and read.
you must, therefore, pardon the freedom with which i demand your attention; your feelings, i know, will bestow it unwillingly, but i demand it of your justice.
two offences of a very different nature, and by no means of equal magnitude, you last night laid to my charge.
the first mentioned was, that, regardless of the sentiments of either, i had detached mr. bingley from your sister,and the other, that i had, in defiance of various claims, in defiance of honour and humanity, ruined the immediate prosperity and blasted the prospects of mr. wickham.
wilfully and wantonly to have thrown off the companion of my youth, the acknowledged favourite of my father, a young man who had scarcely any other dependence than on our patronage, and who had been brought up to expect its exertion, would be a depravity, to which the separation of two young persons whose affection could be the growth of only a few weeks, could bear no comparison.
but from the severity of that blame which was last night so liberally bestowed, respecting each circumstance, i shall hope to be in future secured, when the following account of my actions and their motives has been read.
if, in the explanation of them which is due to myself, i am under the necessity of relating feelings which may be offensive to yours, i can only say that i am sorry.
the necessity must be obeyed, and further apology would be absurd.
i had not been long in hertfordshire before i saw, in common with others, that bingley preferred your elder sister to any other young woman in the country.
but it was not till the evening of the dance at netherfield that i had any apprehension of his feeling a serious attachment.
i had often seen him in love before.
at that ball, while i had the honour of dancing with you, i was first made acquainted, by sir william lucass accidental information, that bingleys attentions to your sister had given rise to a general expectation of their marriage.
he spoke of it as a certain event, of which the time alone could be undecided.
from that moment i observed my friends behaviour attentively; and i could then perceive that his partiality for miss bennet was beyond what i had ever witnessed in him.
your sister i also watched.
her look and manners were open, cheerful, and engaging as ever, but without any symptom of peculiar regard; and i remained convinced, from the evenings scrutiny, that though she received his attentions with pleasure, she did not invite them by any participation of sentiment.
if you have not been mistaken here, i must have been in an error.
your superior knowledge of your sister must make the latter probable.
if it be so, if i have been misled by such error to inflict pain on her, your resentment has not been unreasonable.
but i shall not scruple to assert, that the serenity of your sisters countenance and air was such as might have given the most acute observer a conviction that, however amiable her temper, her heart was not likely to be easily touched.
that i was desirous of believing her indifferent is certain; but i will venture to say that my investigations and decisions are not usually influenced by my hopes or fears.
i did not believe her to be indifferent because i wished it; i believed it on impartial conviction, as truly as i wished it in reason.
my objections to the marriage were not merely those which i last night acknowledged to have required the utmost force of passion to put aside in my own case; the want of connection could not be so great an evil to my friend as to me.
but there were other causes of repugnance; causes which, though still existing, and existing to an equal degree in both instances, i had myself endeavoured to forget, because they were not immediately before me.
these causes must be stated, though briefly.
the situation of your mothers family, though objectionable, was nothing in comparison of that total want of propriety so frequently, so almost uniformly betrayed by herself, by your three younger sisters, and occasionally even by your father:pardon me,it pains me to offend you.
but amidst your concern for the defects of your nearest relations, and your displeasure at this representation of them, let it give you consolation to consider that to have conducted yourselves so as to avoid any share of the like censure is praise no less generally bestowed on you and your eldest sister than it is honourable to the sense and disposition of both.
i will only say, farther, that from what passed that evening my opinion of all parties was confirmed, and every inducement heightened, which could have led me before to preserve my friend from what i esteemed a most unhappy connection.
he left netherfield for london on the day following, as you, i am certain, remember, with the design of soon returning.
the part which i acted is now to be explained.
his sisters uneasiness had been equally excited with my own: our coincidence of feeling was soon discovered; and, alike sensible that no time was to be lost in detaching their brother, we shortly resolved on joining him directly in london.
we accordingly wentand there i readily engaged in the office of pointing out to my friend the certain evils of such a choice.
i described and enforced them earnestly.
but however this remonstrance might have staggered or delayed his determination, i do not suppose that it would ultimately have prevented the marriage, had it not been seconded by the assurance, which i hesitated not in giving, of your sisters indifference.
he had before believed her to return his affection with sincere, if not with equal, regard.
but bingley has great natural modesty, with a stronger dependence on my judgment than on his own.
to convince him, therefore, that he had deceived himself was no very difficult point.
to persuade him against returning into hertfordshire, when that conviction had been given, was scarcely the work of a moment.
i cannot blame myself for having done thus much.
there is but one part of my conduct, in the whole affair, on which i do not reflect with satisfaction; it is that i condescended to adopt the measures of art so far as to conceal from him your sisters being in town.
i knew it myself, as it was known to miss bingley; but her brother is even yet ignorant of it.
that they might have met without ill consequence is, perhaps, probable; but his regard did not appear to me enough extinguished for him to see her without some danger.
perhaps this concealment, this disguise, was beneath me.
it is done, however, and it was done for the best.
on this subject i have nothing more to say, no other apology to offer.
if i have wounded your sisters feelings, it was unknowingly done; and though the motives which governed me may to you very naturally appear insufficient, i have not yet learnt to condemn them.with respect to that other, more weighty accusation, of having injured mr. wickham, i can only refute it by laying before you the whole of his connection with my family.
of what he has particularly accused me i am ignorant; but of the truth of what i shall relate i can summon more than one witness of undoubted veracity.
mr. wickham is the son of a very respectable man, who had for many years the management of all the pemberley estates, and whose good conduct in the discharge of his trust naturally inclined my father to be of service to him; and on george wickham, who was his godson, his kindness was therefore liberally bestowed.
my father supported him at school, and afterwards at cambridge; most important assistance, as his own father, always poor from the extravagance of his wife, would have been unable to give him a gentlemans education.
my father was not only fond of this young mans society, whose manners were always engaging, he had also the highest opinion of him, and hoping the church would be his profession, intended to provide for him in it.
as for myself, it is many, many years since i first began to think of him in a very different manner.
the vicious propensities, the want of principle, which he was careful to guard from the knowledge of his best friend, could not escape the observation of a young man of nearly the same age with himself, and who had opportunities of seeing him in unguarded moments, which mr. darcy could not have.
here again i shall give you painto what degree you only can tell.
but whatever may be the sentiments which mr. wickham has created, a suspicion of their nature shall not prevent me from unfolding his real character.
it adds even another motive.
my excellent father died about five years ago; and his attachment to mr. wickham was to the last so steady, that in his will he particularly recommended it to me to promote his advancement in the best manner that his profession might allow, and if he took orders, desired that a valuable family living might be his as soon as it became vacant.
there was also a legacy of one thousand pounds.
his own father did not long survive mine; and within half a year from these events mr. wickham wrote to inform me that, having finally resolved against taking orders, he hoped i should not think it unreasonable for him to expect some more immediate pecuniary advantage, in lieu of the preferment, by which he could not be benefited.
he had some intention, he added, of studying the law, and i must be aware that the interest of one thousand pounds would be a very insufficient support therein.
i rather wished than believed him to be sincere; but, at any rate, was perfectly ready to accede to his proposal.
i knew that mr. wickham ought not to be a clergyman.
the business was therefore soon settled.
he resigned all claim to assistance in the church, were it possible that he could ever be in a situation to receive it, and accepted in return three thousand pounds.
all connection between us seemed now dissolved.
i thought too ill of him to invite him to pemberley, or admit his society in town.
in town, i believe, he chiefly lived, but his studying the law was a mere pretence; and being now free from all restraint, his life was a life of idleness and dissipation.
for about three years i heard little of him; but on the decease of the incumbent of the living which had been designed for him, he applied to me again by letter for the presentation.
his circumstances, he assured me, and i had no difficulty in believing it, were exceedingly bad.
he had found the law a most unprofitable study, and was now absolutely resolved on being ordained, if i would present him to the living in questionof which he trusted there could be little doubt, as he was well assured that i had no other person to provide for, and i could not have forgotten my revered fathers intentions.
you will hardly blame me for refusing to comply with this entreaty, or for resisting every repetition of it.
his resentment was in proportion to the distress of his circumstancesand he was doubtless as violent in his abuse of me to others as in his reproaches to myself.
after this period, every appearance of acquaintance was dropped.
how he lived, i know not.
but last summer he was again most painfully obtruded on my notice.
i must now mention a circumstance which i would wish to forget myself, and which no obligation less than the present should induce me to unfold to any human being.
having said thus much, i feel no doubt of your secrecy.
my sister, who is more than ten years my junior, was left to the guardianship of my mothers nephew, colonel fitzwilliam, and myself.
about a year ago, she was taken from school, and an establishment formed for her in london; and last summer she went with the lady who presided over it to ramsgate; and thither also went mr. wickham, undoubtedly by design; for there proved to have been a prior acquaintance between him and mrs. younge, in whose character we were most unhappily deceived; and by her connivance and aid he so far recommended himself to georgiana, whose affectionate heart retained a strong impression of his kindness to her as a child, that she was persuaded to believe herself in love and to consent to an elopement.
she was then but fifteen, which must be her excuse; and after stating her imprudence, i am happy to add, that i owed the knowledge of it to herself.
i joined them unexpectedly a day or two before the intended elopement; and then georgiana, unable to support the idea of grieving and offending a brother whom she almost looked up to as a father, acknowledged the whole to me.
you may imagine what i felt and how i acted.
regard for my sisters credit and feelings prevented any public exposure; but i wrote to mr. wickham, who left the place immediately, and mrs. younge was of course removed from her charge.
mr. wickhams chief object was unquestionably my sisters fortune, which is thirty thousand pounds; but i cannot help supposing that the hope of revenging himself on me was a strong inducement.
his revenge would have been complete indeed.
this, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event in which we have been concerned together; and if you do not absolutely reject it as false, you will, i hope, acquit me henceforth of cruelty towards mr. wickham.
i know not in what manner, under what form of falsehood, he has imposed on you; but his success is not perhaps to be wondered at, ignorant as you previously were of everything concerning either.
detection could not be in your power, and suspicion certainly not in your inclination.
you may possibly wonder why all this was not told you last night.
but i was not then master enough of myself to know what could or ought to be revealed.
for the truth of everything here related, i can appeal more particularly to the testimony of colonel fitzwilliam, who, from our near relationship and constant intimacy, and still more as one of the executors of my fathers will, has been unavoidably acquainted with every particular of these transactions.
if your abhorrence of me should make my assertions valueless, you cannot be prevented by the same cause from confiding in my cousin; and that there may be the possibility of consulting him, i shall endeavour to find some opportunity of putting this letter in your hands in the course of the morning.
i will only add, god bless you.
fitzwilliam darcy.
illustration chapter xxxvi.
illustration elizabeth, when mr. darcy gave her the letter, did not expect it to contain a renewal of his offers, she had formed no expectation at all of its contents.
but such as they were, it may be well supposed how eagerly she went through them, and what a contrariety of emotion they excited.
her feelings as she read were scarcely to be defined.
with amazement did she first understand that he believed any apology to be in his power; and steadfastly was she persuaded, that he could have no explanation to give, which a just sense of shame would not conceal.
with a strong prejudice against everything he might say, she began his account of what had happened at netherfield.
she read with an eagerness which hardly left her power of comprehension; and from impatience of knowing what the next sentence might bring, was incapable of attending to the sense of the one before her eyes.
his belief of her sisters insensibility she instantly resolved to be false; and his account of the real, the worst objections to the match, made her too angry to have any wish of doing him justice.
he expressed no regret for what he had done which satisfied her; his style was not penitent, but haughty.
it was all pride and insolence.
but when this subject was succeeded by his account of mr. wickhamwhen she read, with somewhat clearer attention, a relation of events which, if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion of his worth, and which bore so alarming an affinity to his own history of himselfher feelings were yet more acutely painful and more difficult of definition.
astonishment, apprehension, and even horror, oppressed her.
she wished to discredit it entirely, repeatedly exclaiming, this must be false!
this cannot be!
this must be the grossest falsehood!and when she had gone through the whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of the last page or two, put it hastily away, protesting that she would not regard it, that she would never look in it again.
in this perturbed state of mind, with thoughts that could rest on nothing, she walked on; but it would not do: in half a minute the letter was unfolded again; and collecting herself as well as she could, she again began the mortifying perusal of all that related to wickham, and commanded herself so far as to examine the meaning of every sentence.
the account of his connection with the pemberley family was exactly what he had related himself; and the kindness of the late mr. darcy, though she had not before known its extent, agreed equally well with his own words.
so far each recital confirmed the other; but when she came to the will, the difference was great.
what wickham had said of the living was fresh in her memory; and as she recalled his very words, it was impossible not to feel that there was gross duplicity on one side or the other, and, for a few moments, she flattered herself that her wishes did not err.
but when she read and reread, with the closest attention, the particulars immediately following of wickhams resigning all pretensions to the living, of his receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as three thousand pounds, again was she forced to hesitate.
she put down the letter, weighed every circumstance with what she meant to be impartialitydeliberated on the probability of each statementbut with little success.
on both sides it was only assertion.
again she read on.
but every line proved more clearly that the affair, which she had believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to render mr. darcys conduct in it less than infamous, was capable of a turn which must make him entirely blameless throughout the whole.
the extravagance and general profligacy which he scrupled not to lay to mr. wickhams charge exceedingly shocked her; the more so, as she could bring no proof of its injustice.
she had never heard of him before his entrance into the shire militia, in which he had engaged at the persuasion of the young man, who, on meeting him accidentally in town, had there renewed a slight acquaintance.
of his former way of life, nothing had been known in hertfordshire but what he told illustration: meeting accidentally in town copyright 1894 by george allen.
himself.
as to his real character, had information been in her power, she had never felt a wish of inquiring.
his countenance, voice, and manner, had established him at once in the possession of every virtue.
she tried to recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished trait of integrity or benevolence, that might rescue him from the attacks of mr. darcy; or at least, by the predominance of virtue, atone for those casual errors, under which she would endeavour to class what mr. darcy had described as the idleness and vice of many years continuance.
but no such recollection befriended her.
she could see him instantly before her, in every charm of air and address, but she could remember no more substantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood, and the regard which his social powers had gained him in the mess.
after pausing on this point a considerable while, she once more continued to read.
but, alas!
the story which followed, of his designs on miss darcy, received some confirmation from what had passed between colonel fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at last she was referred for the truth of every particular to colonel fitzwilliam himselffrom whom she had previously received the information of his near concern in all his cousins affairs and whose character she had no reason to question.
at one time she had almost resolved on applying to him, but the idea was checked by the awkwardness of the application, and at length wholly banished by the conviction that mr. darcy would never have hazarded such a proposal, if he had not been well assured of his cousins corroboration.
she perfectly remembered everything that had passed in conversation between wickham and herself in their first evening at mr. philipss.
many of his expressions were still fresh in her memory.
she was now struck with the impropriety of such communications to a stranger, and wondered it had escaped her before.
she saw the indelicacy of putting himself forward as he had done, and the inconsistency of his professions with his conduct.
she remembered that he had boasted of having no fear of seeing mr. darcythat mr. darcy might leave the country, but that he should stand his ground; yet he had avoided the netherfield ball the very next week.
she remembered, also, that till the netherfield family had quitted the country, he had told his story to no one but herself; but that after their removal, it had been everywhere discussed; that he had then no reserves, no scruples in sinking mr. darcys character, though he had assured her that respect for the father would always prevent his exposing the son.
how differently did everything now appear in which he was concerned!
his attentions to miss king were now the consequence of views solely and hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of her fortune proved no longer the moderation of his wishes, but his eagerness to grasp at anything.
his behaviour to herself could now have had no tolerable motive: he had either been deceived with regard to her fortune, or had been gratifying his vanity by encouraging the preference which she believed she had most incautiously shown.
every lingering struggle in his favour grew fainter and fainter; and in further justification of mr. darcy, she could not but allow that mr. bingley, when questioned by jane, had long ago asserted his blamelessness in the affair;that, proud and repulsive as were his manners, she had never, in the whole course of their acquaintancean acquaintance which had latterly brought them much together, and given her a sort of intimacy with his waysseen anything that betrayed him to be unprincipled or unjustanything that spoke him of irreligious or immoral habits;that among his own connections he was esteemed and valued;that even wickham had allowed him merit as a brother, and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of his sister as to prove him capable of some amiable feeling;that had his actions been what wickham represented them, so gross a violation of everything right could hardly have been concealed from the world; and that friendship between a person capable of it and such an amiable man as mr. bingley was incomprehensible.
she grew absolutely ashamed of herself.
of neither darcy nor wickham could she think, without feeling that she had been blind, partial, prejudiced, absurd.
how despicably have i acted!
she cried.
i, who have prided myself on my discernment!
i, who have valued myself on my abilities!
who have often disdained the generous candour of my sister, and gratified my vanity in useless or blameless distrust.
how humiliating is this discovery!
yet, how just a humiliation!
had i been in love, i could not have been more wretchedly blind.
but vanity, not love, has been my folly.
pleased with the preference of one, and offended by the neglect of the other, on the very beginning of our acquaintance, i have courted prepossession and ignorance, and driven reason away where either were concerned.
till this moment, i never knew myself.
from herself to jane, from jane to bingley, her thoughts were in a line which soon brought to her recollection that mr. darcys explanation there had appeared very insufficient; and she read it again.
widely different was the effect of a second perusal.
how could she deny that credit to his assertions, in one instance, which she had been obliged to give in the other?
he declared himself to have been totally unsuspicious of her sisters attachment; and she could not help remembering what charlottes opinion had always been.
neither could she deny the justice of his description of jane.
she felt that janes feelings, though fervent, were little displayed, and that there was a constant complacency in her air and manner, not often united with great sensibility.
when she came to that part of the letter in which her family were mentioned, in tones of such mortifying, yet merited, reproach, her sense of shame was severe.
the justice of the charge struck her too forcibly for denial; and the circumstances to which he particularly alluded, as having passed at the netherfield ball, and as confirming all his first disapprobation, could not have made a stronger impression on his mind than on hers.
the compliment to herself and her sister was not unfelt.
it soothed, but it could not console her for the contempt which had been thus selfattracted by the rest of her family; and as she considered that janes disappointment had, in fact, been the work of her nearest relations, and reflected how materially the credit of both must be hurt by such impropriety of conduct, she felt depressed beyond anything she had ever known before.
after wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to every variety of thought, reconsidering events, determining probabilities, and reconciling herself, as well as she could, to a change so sudden and so important, fatigue, and a recollection of her long absence, made her at length return home; and she entered the house with the wish of appearing cheerful as usual, and the resolution of repressing such reflections as must make her unfit for conversation.
she was immediately told, that the two gentlemen from rosings had each called during her absence; mr. darcy, only for a few minutes, to take leave, but that colonel fitzwilliam had been sitting with them at least an hour, hoping for her return, and almost resolving to walk after her till she could be found.
elizabeth could but just affect concern in missing him; she really rejoiced at it.
colonel fitzwilliam was no longer an object.
she could think only of her letter.
illustration: his parting obeisance  chapter xxxvii.
illustration the two gentlemen left rosings the next morning; and mr. collins having been in waiting near the lodges, to make them his parting obeisance, was able to bring home the pleasing intelligence of their appearing in very good health, and in as tolerable spirits as could be expected, after the melancholy scene so lately gone through at rosings.
to rosings he then hastened to console lady catherine and her daughter; and on his return brought back, with great satisfaction, a message from her ladyship, importing that she felt herself so dull as to make her very desirous of having them all to dine with her.
elizabeth could not see lady catherine without recollecting that, had she chosen it, she might by this time have been presented to her as her future niece; nor could she think, without a smile, of what her ladyships indignation would have been.
what would she have said?
how would she have behaved?
were the questions with which she amused herself.
their first subject was the diminution of the rosings party.
i assure you, i feel it exceedingly, said lady catherine; i believe nobody feels the loss of friends so much as i do.
but i am particularly attached to these young men; and know them to be so much attached to me!
they were excessively sorry to go!
but so they always are.
the dear colonel rallied his spirits tolerably till just at last; but darcy seemed to feel it most acutelymore, i think, than last year.
his attachment to rosings certainly increases.
mr. collins had a compliment and an allusion to throw in here, which were kindly smiled on by the mother and daughter.
lady catherine observed, after dinner, that miss bennet seemed out of spirits; and immediately accounting for it herself, by supposing that she did not like to go home again so soon, she added, but if that is the case, you must write to your mother to beg that you may stay a little longer.
mrs. collins will be very glad of your company, i am sure.
i am much obliged to your ladyship for your kind invitation, replied elizabeth; but it is not in my power to accept it.
i must be in town next saturday.
why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks.
i expected you to stay two months.
i told mrs. collins so before you came.
there can be no occasion for your going so soon.
mrs. bennet could certainly spare you for another fortnight.
but my father cannot.
he wrote last week to hurry my return.
illustration: dawson copyright 1894 by george allen.
oh, your father, of course, may spare you, if your mother can.
daughters are never of so much consequence to a father.
and if you will stay another month complete, it will be in my power to take one of you as far as london, for i am going there early in june, for a week; and as dawson does not object to the barouchebox, there will be very good room for one of youand, indeed, if the weather should happen to be cool, i should not object to taking you both, as you are neither of you large.
you are all kindness, madam; but i believe we must abide by our original plan.
lady catherine seemed resigned.
mrs. collins, you must send a servant with them.
you know i always speak my mind, and i cannot bear the idea of two young women travelling post by themselves.
it is highly improper.
you must contrive to send somebody.
i have the greatest dislike in the world to that sort of thing.
young women should always be properly guarded and attended, according to their situation in life.
when my niece georgiana went to ramsgate last summer, i made a point of her having two menservants go with her.
miss darcy, the daughter of mr. darcy of pemberley, and lady anne, could not have appeared with propriety in a different manner.
i am excessively attentive to all those things.
you must send john with the young ladies, mrs. collins.
i am glad it occurred to me to mention it; for it would really be discreditable to you to let them go alone.
my uncle is to send a servant for us.
oh!
your uncle!
he keeps a manservant, does he?
i am very glad you have somebody who thinks of those things.
where shall you change horses?
oh, bromley, of course.
if you mention my name at the bell, you will be attended to.
lady catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their journey; and as she did not answer them all herself attention was necessarywhich elizabeth believed to be lucky for her; or, with a mind so occupied, she might have forgotten where she was.
reflection must be reserved for solitary hours: whenever she was alone, she gave way to it as the greatest relief; and not a day went by without a solitary walk, in which she might indulge in all the delight of unpleasant recollections.
mr. darcys letter she was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart.
she studied every sentence; and her feelings towards its writer were at times widely different.
when she remembered the style of his address, she was still full of indignation: but when she considered how unjustly she had condemned and upbraided him, her anger was turned against herself; and his disappointed feelings became the object of compassion.
his attachment excited gratitude, his general character respect: but she could not approve him; nor could she for a moment repent her refusal, or feel the slightest inclination ever to see him again.
in her own past behaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and regret: and in the unhappy defects of her family, a subject of yet heavier chagrin.
they were hopeless of remedy.
her father, contented with laughing at them, would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness of his youngest daughters; and her mother, with manners so far from right herself, was entirely insensible of the evil.
elizabeth had frequently united with jane in an endeavour to check the imprudence of catherine and lydia; but while they were supported by their mothers indulgence, what chance could there be of improvement?
catherine, weakspirited, irritable, and completely under lydias guidance, had been always affronted by their advice; and lydia, selfwilled and careless, would scarcely give them a hearing.
they were ignorant, idle, and vain.
while there was an officer in meryton, they would flirt with him; and while meryton was within a walk of longbourn, they would be going there for ever.
anxiety on janes behalf was another prevailing concern; and mr. darcys explanation, by restoring bingley to all her former good opinion, heightened the sense of what jane had lost.
his affection was proved to have been sincere, and his conduct cleared of all blame, unless any could attach to the implicitness of his confidence in his friend.
how grievous then was the thought that, of a situation so desirable in every respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for happiness, jane had been deprived, by the folly and indecorum of her own family!
when to these recollections was added the development of wickhams character, it may be easily believed that the happy spirits which had seldom been depressed before were now so much affected as to make it almost impossible for her to appear tolerably cheerful.
their engagements at rosings were as frequent during the last week of her stay as they had been at first.
the very last evening was spent there; and her ladyship again inquired minutely into the particulars of their journey, gave them directions as to the best method of packing, and was so urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right way, that maria thought herself obliged, on her return, to undo all the work of the morning, and pack her trunk afresh.
when they parted, lady catherine, with great condescension, wished them a good journey, and invited them to come to hunsford again next year; and miss de bourgh exerted herself so far as to courtesy and hold out her hand to both.
illustration: the elevation of his feelings.
chapter xxxviii.
illustration on saturday morning elizabeth and mr. collins met for breakfast a few minutes before the others appeared; and he took the opportunity of paying the parting civilities which he deemed indispensably necessary.
i know not, miss elizabeth, said he, whether mrs. collins has yet expressed her sense of your kindness in coming to us; but i am very certain you will not leave the house without receiving her thanks for it.
the favour of your company has been much felt, i assure you.
we know how little there is to tempt anyone to our humble abode.
our plain manner of living, our small rooms, and few domestics, and the little we see of the world, must make hunsford extremely dull to a young lady like yourself; but i hope you will believe us grateful for the condescension, and that we have done everything in our power to prevent you spending your time unpleasantly.
elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness.
she had spent six weeks with great enjoyment; and the pleasure of being with charlotte, and the kind attention she had received, must make her feel the obliged.
mr. collins was gratified; and with a more smiling solemnity replied, it gives me the greatest pleasure to hear that you have passed your time not disagreeably.
we have certainly done our best; and most fortunately having it in our power to introduce you to very superior society, and from our connection with rosings, the frequent means of varying the humble home scene, i think we may flatter ourselves that your hunsford visit cannot have been entirely irksome.
our situation with regard to lady catherines family is, indeed, the sort of extraordinary advantage and blessing which few can boast.
you see on what a footing we are.
you see how continually we are engaged there.
in truth, i must acknowledge, that, with all the disadvantages of this humble parsonage, i should not think anyone abiding in it an object of compassion, while they are sharers of our intimacy at rosings.
words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings; and he was obliged to walk about the room, while elizabeth tried to unite civility and truth in a few short sentences.
you may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of us into hertfordshire, my dear cousin.
i flatter myself, at least, that you will be able to do so.
lady catherines great attentions to mrs. collins you have been a daily witness of; and altogether i trust it does not appear that your friend has drawn an unfortunatebut on this point it will be as well to be silent.
only let me assure you, my dear miss elizabeth, that i can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in marriage.
my dear charlotte and i have but one mind and one way of thinking.
there is in everything a most remarkable resemblance of character and ideas between us.
we seem to have been designed for each other.
elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where that was the case, and with equal sincerity could add, that she firmly believed and rejoiced in his domestic comforts.
she was not sorry, however, to have the recital of them interrupted by the entrance of the lady from whom they sprang.
poor charlotte!
it was melancholy to leave her to such society!
but she had chosen it with her eyes open; and though evidently regretting that her visitors were to go, she did not seem to ask for compassion.
her home and her housekeeping, her parish and her poultry, and all their dependent concerns, had not yet lost their charms.
at length the chaise arrived, the trunks were fastened on, the parcels placed within, and it was pronounced to be ready.
after an affectionate parting between the friends, elizabeth was attended to the carriage by mr. collins; and as they walked down the garden, he was commissioning her with his best respects to all her family, not forgetting his thanks for the kindness he had received at longbourn in the winter, and his compliments to mr. and mrs. gardiner, though unknown.
he then handed her in, maria followed, and the door was on the point of being closed, when he suddenly reminded them, with some consternation, that they had hitherto forgotten to leave any message for the ladies of rosings.
illustration: they had forgotten to leave any message  but, he added, you will of course wish to have your humble respects delivered to them, with your grateful thanks for their kindness to you while you have been here.
elizabeth made no objection: the door was then allowed to be shut, and the carriage drove off.
good gracious!
cried maria, after a few minutes silence, it seems but a day or two since we first came!
and yet how many things have happened!
a great many indeed, said her companion, with a sigh.
we have dined nine times at rosings, besides drinking tea there twice!
how much i shall have to tell!
elizabeth privately added, and how much i shall have to conceal!
their journey was performed without much conversation, or any alarm; and within four hours of their leaving hunsford they reached mr. gardiners house, where they were to remain a few days.
jane looked well, and elizabeth had little opportunity of studying her spirits, amidst the various engagements which the kindness of her aunt had reserved for them.
but jane was to go home with her, and at longbourn there would be leisure enough for observation.
it was not without an effort, meanwhile, that she could wait even for longbourn, before she told her sister of mr. darcys proposals.
to know that she had the power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of her own vanity she had not yet been able to reason away, was such a temptation to openness as nothing could have conquered, but the state of indecision in which she remained as to the extent of what she should communicate, and her fear, if she once entered on the subject, of being hurried into repeating something of bingley, which might only grieve her sister further.
illustration: how nicely we are crammed in  chapter xxxix.
illustration it was the second week in may, in which the three young ladies set out together from gracechurch street for the town of , in hertfordshire; and, as they drew near the appointed inn where mr. bennets carriage was to meet them, they quickly perceived, in token of the coachmans punctuality, both kitty and lydia looking out of a diningroom upstairs.
these two girls had been above an hour in the place, happily employed in visiting an opposite milliner, watching the sentinel on guard, and dressing a salad and cucumber.
after welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly displayed a table set out with such cold meat as an inn larder usually affords, exclaiming, is not this nice?
is not this an agreeable surprise?
and we mean to treat you all, added lydia; but you must lend us the money, for we have just spent ours at the shop out there.
then showing her purchases,look here, i have bought this bonnet.
i do not think it is very pretty; but i thought i might as well buy it as not.
i shall pull it to pieces as soon as i get home, and see if i can make it up any better.
and when her sisters abused it as ugly, she added, with perfect unconcern, oh, but there were two or three much uglier in the shop; and when i have bought some prettiercoloured satin to trim it with fresh, i think it will be very tolerable.
besides, it will not much signify what one wears this summer, after the shire have left meryton, and they are going in a fortnight.
are they, indeed?
cried elizabeth, with the greatest satisfaction.
they are going to be encamped near brighton; and i do so want papa to take us all there for the summer!
it would be such a delicious scheme, and i dare say would hardly cost anything at all.
mamma would like to go, too, of all things!
only think what a miserable summer else we shall have!
yes, thought elizabeth; that would be a delightful scheme, indeed, and completely do for us at once.
good heaven!
brighton and a whole campful of soldiers, to us, who have been overset already by one poor regiment of militia, and the monthly balls of meryton!
now i have got some news for you, said lydia, as they sat down to table.
what do you think?
it is excellent news, capital news, and about a certain person that we all like.
jane and elizabeth looked at each other, and the waiter was told that he need not stay.
lydia laughed, and said, ay, that is just like your formality and discretion.
you thought the waiter must not hear, as if he cared!
i dare say he often hears worse things said than i am going to say.
but he is an ugly fellow!
i am glad he is gone.
i never saw such a long chin in my life.
well, but now for my news: it is about dear wickham; too good for the waiter, is not it?
there is no danger of wickhams marrying mary kingtheres for you!
she is gone down to her uncle at liverpool; gone to stay.
wickham is safe.
and mary king is safe!
added elizabeth; safe from a connection imprudent as to fortune.
she is a great fool for going away, if she liked him.
but i hope there is no strong attachment on either side, said jane.
i am sure there is not on his.
i will answer for it, he never cared three straws about her.
who could about such a nasty little freckled thing?
elizabeth was shocked to think that, however incapable of such coarseness of expression herself, the coarseness of the sentiment was little other than her own breast had formerly harboured and fancied liberal!
as soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was ordered; and, after some contrivance, the whole party, with all their boxes, workbags, and parcels, and the unwelcome addition of kittys and lydias purchases, were seated in it.
how nicely we are crammed in!
cried lydia.
i am glad i brought my bonnet, if it is only for the fun of having another bandbox!
well, now let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh all the way home.
and in the first place, let us hear what has happened to you all since you went away.
have you seen any pleasant men?
have you had any flirting?
i was in great hopes that one of you would have got a husband before you came back.
jane will be quite an old maid soon, i declare.
she is almost threeandtwenty!
lord!
how ashamed i should be of not being married before threeandtwenty!
my aunt philips wants you so to get husbands you cant think.
she says lizzy had better have taken mr. collins; but i do not think there would have been any fun in it.
lord!
how i should like to be married before any of you!
and then i would chaperon you about to all the balls.
dear me!
we had such a good piece of fun the other day at colonel forsters!
kitty and me were to spend the day there, and mrs. forster promised to have a little dance in the evening; (bythebye, mrs. forster and me are such friends!)
and so she asked the two harringtons to come: but harriet was ill, and so pen was forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did?
we dressed up chamberlayne in womans clothes, on purpose to pass for a lady,only think what fun!
not a soul knew of it, but colonel and mrs. forster, and kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were forced to borrow one of her gowns; and you cannot imagine how well he looked!
when denny, and wickham, and pratt, and two or three more of the men came in, they did not know him in the least.
lord!
how i laughed!
and so did mrs. forster.
i thought i should have died.
and that made the men suspect something, and then they soon found out what was the matter.
with such kind of histories of their parties and good jokes did lydia, assisted by kittys hints and additions, endeavour to amuse her companions all the way to longbourn.
elizabeth listened as little as she could, but there was no escaping the frequent mention of wickhams name.
their reception at home was most kind.
mrs. bennet rejoiced to see jane in undiminished beauty; and more than once during dinner did mr. bennet say voluntarily to elizabeth, i am glad you are come back, lizzy.
their party in the diningroom was large, for almost all the lucases came to meet maria and hear the news; and various were the subjects which occupied them: lady lucas was inquiring of maria, across the table, after the welfare and poultry of her eldest daughter; mrs. bennet was doubly engaged, on one hand collecting an account of the present fashions from jane, who sat some way below her, and on the other, retailing them all to the younger miss lucases; and lydia, in a voice rather louder than any other persons, was enumerating the various pleasures of the morning to anybody who would hear her.
oh, mary, said she, i wish you had gone with us, for we had such fun!
as we went along kitty and me drew up all the blinds, and pretended there was nobody in the coach; and i should have gone so all the way, if kitty had not been sick; and when we got to the george, i do think we behaved very handsomely, for we treated the other three with the nicest cold luncheon in the world, and if you would have gone, we would have treated you too.
and then when we came away it was such fun!
i thought we never should have got into the coach.
i was ready to die of laughter.
and then we were so merry all the way home!
we talked and laughed so loud, that anybody might have heard us ten miles off!
to this, mary very gravely replied, far be it from me, my dear sister, to depreciate such pleasures.
they would doubtless be congenial with the generality of female minds.
but i confess they would have no charms for me.
i should infinitely prefer a book.
but of this answer lydia heard not a word.
she seldom listened to anybody for more than half a minute, and never attended to mary at all.
in the afternoon lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to walk to meryton, and see how everybody went on; but elizabeth steadily opposed the scheme.
it should not be said, that the miss bennets could not be at home half a day before they were in pursuit of the officers.
there was another reason, too, for her opposition.
she dreaded seeing wickham again, and was resolved to avoid it as long as possible.
the comfort to her, of the regiments approaching removal, was indeed beyond expression.
in a fortnight they were to go, and once gone, she hoped there could be nothing more to plague her on his account.
she had not been many hours at home, before she found that the brighton scheme, of which lydia had given them a hint at the inn, was under frequent discussion between her parents.
elizabeth saw directly that her father had not the smallest intention of yielding; but his answers were at the same time so vague and equivocal, that her mother, though often disheartened, had never yet despaired of succeeding at last.
illustration chapter xl.
illustration elizabeths impatience to acquaint jane with what had happened could no longer be overcome; and at length resolving to suppress every particular in which her sister was concerned, and preparing her to be surprised, she related to her the next morning the chief of the scene between mr. darcy and herself.
miss bennets astonishment was soon lessened by the strong sisterly partiality which made any admiration of elizabeth appear perfectly natural; and all surprise was shortly lost in other feelings.
she was sorry that mr. darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so little suited to recommend them; but still more was she grieved for the unhappiness which her sisters refusal must have given him.
his being so sure of succeeding was wrong, said she, and certainly ought not to have appeared; but consider how much it must increase his disappointment.
indeed, replied elizabeth, i am heartily sorry for him; but he has other feelings which will probably soon drive away his regard for me.
you do not blame me, however, for refusing him?
blame you!
oh, no.
but you blame me for having spoken so warmly of wickham?
noi do not know that you were wrong in saying what you did.
but you will know it, when i have told you what happened the very next day.
she then spoke of the letter, repeating the whole of its contents as far as they concerned george wickham.
what a stroke was this for poor jane, who would willingly have gone through the world without believing that so much wickedness existed in the whole race of mankind as was here collected in one individual!
nor was darcys vindication, though grateful to her feelings, capable of consoling her for such discovery.
most earnestly did she labour to prove the probability of error, and seek to clear one, without involving the other.
this will not do, said elizabeth; you never will be able to make both of them good for anything.
take your choice, but you must be satisfied with only one.
there is but such a quantity of merit between them; just enough to make one good sort of man; and of late it has been shifting about pretty much.
for my part, i am inclined to believe it all mr. darcys, but you shall do as you choose.
it was some time, however, before a smile could be extorted from jane.
i do not know when i have been more shocked, said she.
wickham so very bad!
it is almost past belief.
and poor mr. darcy!
dear lizzy, only consider what he must have suffered.
such a disappointment!
and with the knowledge of your ill opinion too!
and having to relate such a thing of his sister!
it is really too distressing, i am sure you must feel it so.
oh no, my regret and compassion are all done away by seeing you so full of both.
i know you will do him such ample justice, that i am growing every moment more unconcerned and indifferent.
your profusion makes me saving; and if you lament over him much longer, my heart will be as light as a feather.
poor wickham!
there is such an expression of goodness in his countenance!
such an openness and gentleness in his manner.
there certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of those two young men.
one has got all the goodness, and the other all the appearance of it.
i never thought mr. darcy so deficient in the appearance of it as you used to do.
and yet i meant to be uncommonly clever in taking so decided a dislike to him, without any reason.
it is such a spur to ones genius, such an opening for wit, to have a dislike of that kind.
one may be continually abusive without saying anything just; but one cannot be always laughing at a man without now and then stumbling on something witty.
lizzy, when you first read that letter, i am sure you could not treat the matter as you do now.
indeed, i could not.
i was uncomfortable enough, i was very uncomfortablei may say unhappy.
and with no one to speak to of what i felt, no jane to comfort me, and say that i had not been so very weak, and vain, and nonsensical, as i knew i had!
oh, how i wanted you!
how unfortunate that you should have used such very strong expressions in speaking of wickham to mr. darcy, for now they do appear wholly undeserved.
certainly.
but the misfortune of speaking with bitterness is a most natural consequence of the prejudices i had been encouraging.
there is one point on which i want your advice.
i want to be told whether i ought, or ought not, to make our acquaintance in general understand wickhams character.
miss bennet paused a little, and then replied, surely there can be no occasion for exposing him so dreadfully.
what is your own opinion?
that it ought not to be attempted.
mr. darcy has not authorized me to make his communication public.
on the contrary, every particular relative to his sister was meant to be kept as much as possible to myself; and if i endeavour to undeceive people as to the rest of his conduct, who will believe me?
the general prejudice against mr. darcy is so violent, that it would be the death of half the good people in meryton, to attempt to place him in an amiable light.
i am not equal to it.
wickham will soon be gone; and, therefore, it will not signify to anybody here what he really is.
some time hence it will be all found out, and then we may laugh at their stupidity in not knowing it before.
at present i will say nothing about it.
you are quite right.
to have his errors made public might ruin him for ever.
he is now, perhaps, sorry for what he has done, and anxious to reestablish a character.
we must not make him desperate.
the tumult of elizabeths mind was allayed by this conversation.
she had got rid of two of the secrets which had weighed on her for a fortnight, and was certain of a willing listener in jane, whenever she might wish to talk again of either.
but there was still something lurking behind, of which prudence forbade the disclosure.
she dared not relate the other half of mr. darcys letter, nor explain to her sister how sincerely she had been valued by his friend.
here was knowledge in which no one could partake; and she was sensible that nothing less than a perfect understanding between the parties could justify her in throwing off this last encumbrance of mystery.
and then, said she, if that very improbable event should ever take place, i shall merely be able to tell what bingley may tell in a much more agreeable manner himself.
the liberty of communication cannot be mine till it has lost all its value!
she was now, on being settled at home, at leisure to observe the real state of her sisters spirits.
jane was not happy.
she still cherished a very tender affection for bingley.
having never even fancied herself in love before, her regard had all the warmth of first attachment, and from her age and disposition, greater steadiness than first attachments often boast; and so fervently did she value his remembrance, and prefer him to every other man, that all her good sense, and all her attention to the feelings of her friends, were requisite to check the indulgence of those regrets which must have been injurious to her own health and their tranquillity.
well, lizzy, said mrs. bennet, one day, what is your opinion now of this sad business of janes?
for my part, i am determined never to speak of it again to anybody.
i told my sister philips so the other day.
but i cannot find out that jane saw anything of him in london.
well, he is a very undeserving young manand i do not suppose there is the least chance in the world of her ever getting him now.
there is no talk of his coming to netherfield again in the summer; and i have inquired of everybody, too, who is likely to know.
illustration: i am determined never to speak of it again  i do not believe that he will ever live at netherfield any more.
oh, well!
it is just as he chooses.
nobody wants him to come; though i shall always say that he used my daughter extremely ill; and, if i was her, i would not have put up with it.
well, my comfort is, i am sure jane will die of a broken heart, and then he will be sorry for what he has done.
but as elizabeth could not receive comfort from any such expectation she made no answer.
well, lizzy, continued her mother, soon afterwards, and so the collinses live very comfortable, do they?
well, well, i only hope it will last.
and what sort of table do they keep?
charlotte is an excellent manager, i dare say.
if she is half as sharp as her mother, she is saving enough.
there is nothing extravagant in their housekeeping, i dare say.
no, nothing at all.
a great deal of good management, depend upon it.
yes, yes.
they will take care not to outrun their income.
they will never be distressed for money.
well, much good may it do them!
and so, i suppose, they often talk of having longbourn when your father is dead.
they look upon it quite as their own, i dare say, whenever that happens.
it was a subject which they could not mention before me.
no; it would have been strange if they had.
but i make no doubt they often talk of it between themselves.
well, if they can be easy with an estate that is not lawfully their own, so much the better.
i should be ashamed of having one that was only entailed on me.
illustration: when colonel millers regiment went away copyright 1894 by george allen.
chapter xli.
illustration the first week of their return was soon gone.
the second began.
it was the last of the regiments stay in meryton, and all the young ladies in the neighbourhood were drooping apace.
the dejection was almost universal.
the elder miss bennets alone were still able to eat, drink, and sleep, and pursue the usual course of their employments.
very frequently were they reproached for this insensibility by kitty and lydia, whose own misery was extreme, and who could not comprehend such hardheartedness in any of the family.
good heaven!
what is to become of us?
what are we to do?
would they often exclaim in the bitterness of woe.
how can you be smiling so, lizzy?
their affectionate mother shared all their grief; she remembered what she had herself endured on a similar occasion fiveandtwenty years ago.
i am sure, said she, i cried for two days together when colonel millers regiment went away.
i thought i should have broke my heart.
i am sure i shall break mine, said lydia.
if one could but go to brighton!
observed mrs. bennet.
oh yes!if one could but go to brighton!
but papa is so disagreeable.
a little seabathing would set me up for ever.
and my aunt philips is sure it would do me a great deal of good, added kitty.
such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through longbourn house.
elizabeth tried to be diverted by them; but all sense of pleasure was lost in shame.
she felt anew the justice of mr. darcys objections; and never had she before been so much disposed to pardon his interference in the views of his friend.
but the gloom of lydias prospect was shortly cleared away; for she received an invitation from mrs. forster, the wife of the colonel of the regiment, to accompany her to brighton.
this invaluable friend was a very young woman, and very lately married.
a resemblance in goodhumour and good spirits had recommended her and lydia to each other, and out of their three months acquaintance they had been intimate two.
the rapture of lydia on this occasion, her adoration of mrs. forster, the delight of mrs. bennet, and the mortification of kitty, are scarcely to be described.
wholly inattentive to her sisters feelings, lydia flew about the house in restless ecstasy, calling for everyones congratulations, and laughing and talking with more violence than ever; whilst the luckless kitty continued in the parlour repining at her fate in terms as unreasonable as her accent was peevish.
i cannot see why mrs. forster should not ask me as well as lydia, said she, though i am not her particular friend.
i have just as much right to be asked as she has, and more too, for i am two years older.
in vain did elizabeth attempt to make her reasonable, and jane to make her resigned.
as for elizabeth herself, this invitation was so far from exciting in her the same feelings as in her mother and lydia, that she considered it as the deathwarrant of all possibility of common sense for the latter; and detestable as such a step must make her, were it known, she could not help secretly advising her father not to let her go.
she represented to him all the improprieties of lydias general behaviour, the little advantage she could derive from the friendship of such a woman as mrs. forster, and the probability of her being yet more imprudent with such a companion at brighton, where the temptations must be greater than at home.
he heard her attentively, and then said, lydia will never be easy till she has exposed herself in some public place or other, and we can never expect her to do it with so little expense or inconvenience to her family as under the present circumstances.
if you were aware, said elizabeth, of the very great disadvantage to us all, which must arise from the public notice of lydias unguarded and imprudent manner, nay, which has already arisen from it, i am sure you would judge differently in the affair.
already arisen!
repeated mr. bennet.
what!
has she frightened away some of your lovers?
poor little lizzy!
but do not be cast down.
such squeamish youths as cannot bear to be connected with a little absurdity are not worth a regret.
come, let me see the list of the pitiful fellows who have been kept aloof by lydias folly.
indeed, you are mistaken.
i have no such injuries to resent.
it is not of peculiar, but of general evils, which i am now complaining.
our importance, our respectability in the world, must be affected by the wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark lydias character.
excuse me,for i must speak plainly.
if you, my dear father, will not take the trouble of checking her exuberant spirits, and of teaching her that her present pursuits are not to be the business of her life, she will soon be beyond the reach of amendment.
her character will be fixed; and she will, at sixteen, be the most determined flirt that ever made herself and her family ridiculous;a flirt, too, in the worst and meanest degree of flirtation; without any attraction beyond youth and a tolerable person; and, from the ignorance and emptiness of her mind, wholly unable to ward off any portion of that universal contempt which her rage for admiration will excite.
in this danger kitty is also comprehended.
she will follow wherever lydia leads.
vain, ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrolled!
oh, my dear father, can you suppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised wherever they are known, and that their sisters will not be often involved in the disgrace?
mr. bennet saw that her whole heart was in the subject; and, affectionately taking her hand, said, in reply, do not make yourself uneasy, my love.
wherever you and jane are known, you must be respected and valued; and you will not appear to less advantage for having a couple ofor i may say, threevery silly sisters.
we shall have no peace at longbourn if lydia does not go to brighton.
let her go, then.
colonel forster is a sensible man, and will keep her out of any real mischief; and she is luckily too poor to be an object of prey to anybody.
at brighton she will be of less importance even as a common flirt than she has been here.
the officers will find women better worth their notice.
let us hope, therefore, that her being there may teach her her own insignificance.
at any rate, she cannot grow many degrees worse, without authorizing us to lock her up for the rest of her life.
with this answer elizabeth was forced to be content; but her own opinion continued the same, and she left him disappointed and sorry.
it was not in her nature, however, to increase her vexations by dwelling on them.
she was confident of having performed her duty; and to fret over unavoidable evils, or augment them by anxiety, was no part of her disposition.
had lydia and her mother known the substance of her conference with her father, their indignation would hardly have found expression in their united volubility.
in lydias imagination, a visit to brighton comprised every possibility of earthly happiness.
she saw, with the creative eye of fancy, the streets of that gay bathingplace covered with officers.
she saw herself the object of attention to tens and to scores of them at present unknown.
she saw all the glories of the camp: its tents stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded with the young and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet; and, to complete the view, she saw herself seated beneath a tent, tenderly flirting with at least six officers at once.
illustration: tenderly flirting copyright 1894 by george allen.
had she known that her sister sought to tear her from such prospects and such realities as these, what would have been her sensations?
they could have been understood only by her mother, who might have felt nearly the same.
lydias going to brighton was all that consoled her for the melancholy conviction of her husbands never intending to go there himself.
but they were entirely ignorant of what had passed; and their raptures continued, with little intermission, to the very day of lydias leaving home.
elizabeth was now to see mr. wickham for the last time.
having been frequently in company with him since her return, agitation was pretty well over; the agitations of former partiality entirely so.
she had even learnt to detect, in the very gentleness which had first delighted her, an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary.
in his present behaviour to herself, moreover, she had a fresh source of displeasure; for the inclination he soon testified of renewing those attentions which had marked the early part of their acquaintance could only serve, after what had since passed, to provoke her.
she lost all concern for him in finding herself thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous gallantry; and while she steadily repressed it, could not but feel the reproof contained in his believing, that however long, and for whatever cause, his attentions had been withdrawn, her vanity would be gratified, and her preference secured, at any time, by their renewal.
on the very last day of the regiments remaining in meryton, he dined, with others of the officers, at longbourn; and so little was elizabeth disposed to part from him in goodhumour, that, on his making some inquiry as to the manner in which her time had passed at hunsford, she mentioned colonel fitzwilliams and mr. darcys having both spent three weeks at rosings, and asked him if he were acquainted with the former.
he looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; but, with a moments recollection, and a returning smile, replied, that he had formerly seen him often; and, after observing that he was a very gentlemanlike man, asked her how she had liked him.
her answer was warmly in his favour.
with an air of indifference, he soon afterwards added, how long did you say that he was at rosings?
nearly three weeks.
and you saw him frequently?
yes, almost every day.
his manners are very different from his cousins.
yes, very different; but i think mr. darcy improves on acquaintance.
indeed!
cried wickham, with a look which did not escape her.
and pray may i ask but checking himself, he added, in a gayer tone, is it in address that he improves?
has he deigned to add aught of civility to his ordinary style?
for i dare not hope, he continued, in a lower and more serious tone, that he is improved in essentials.
oh, no!
said elizabeth.
in essentials, i believe, he is very much what he ever was.
while she spoke, wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to rejoice over her words or to distrust their meaning.
there was a something in her countenance which made him listen with an apprehensive and anxious attention, while she added, when i said that he improved on acquaintance, i did not mean that either his mind or manners were in a state of improvement; but that, from knowing him better, his disposition was better understood.
wickhams alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitated look; for a few minutes he was silent; till, shaking off his embarrassment, he turned to her again, and said in the gentlest of accents, you, who so well know my feelings towards mr. darcy, will readily comprehend how sincerely i must rejoice that he is wise enough to assume even the appearance of what is right.
his pride, in that direction, may be of service, if not to himself, to many others, for it must deter him from such foul misconduct as i have suffered by.
i only fear that the sort of cautiousness to which you, i imagine, have been alluding, is merely adopted on his visits to his aunt, of whose good opinion and judgment he stands much in awe.
his fear of her has always operated, i know, when they were together; and a good deal is to be imputed to his wish of forwarding the match with miss de bourgh, which i am certain he has very much at heart.
elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but she answered only by a slight inclination of the head.
she saw that he wanted to engage her on the old subject of his grievances, and she was in no humour to indulge him.
the rest of the evening passed with the appearance, on his side, of usual cheerfulness, but with no further attempt to distinguish elizabeth; and they parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly a mutual desire of never meeting again.
when the party broke up, lydia returned with mrs. forster to meryton, from whence they were to set out early the next morning.
the separation between her and her family was rather noisy than pathetic.
kitty was the only one who shed tears; but she did weep from vexation and envy.
mrs. bennet was diffuse in her good wishes for the felicity of her daughter, and impressive in her injunctions that she would not miss the opportunity of enjoying herself as much as possible,advice which there was every reason to believe would be attended to; and, in the clamorous happiness of lydia herself in bidding farewell, the more gentle adieus of her sisters were uttered without being heard.
illustration: the arrival of the gardiners  chapter xlii.
illustration had elizabeths opinion been all drawn from her own family, she could not have formed a very pleasing picture of conjugal felicity or domestic comfort.
her father, captivated by youth and beauty, and that appearance of goodhumour which youth and beauty generally give, had married a woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind had very early in their marriage put an end to all real affection for her.
respect, esteem, and confidence had vanished for ever; and all his views of domestic happiness were overthrown.
but mr. bennet was not of a disposition to seek comfort for the disappointment which his own imprudence had brought on in any of those pleasures which too often console the unfortunate for their folly or their vice.
he was fond of the country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen his principal enjoyments.
to his wife he was very little otherwise indebted than as her ignorance and folly had contributed to his amusement.
this is not the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to his wife; but where other powers of entertainment are wanting, the true philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given.
elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of her fathers behaviour as a husband.
she had always seen it with pain; but respecting his abilities, and grateful for his affectionate treatment of herself, she endeavoured to forget what she could not overlook, and to banish from her thoughts that continual breach of conjugal obligation and decorum which, in exposing his wife to the contempt of her own children, was so highly reprehensible.
but she had never felt so strongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the children of so unsuitable a marriage, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising from so illjudged a direction of talentstalents which, rightly used, might at least have preserved the respectability of his daughters, even if incapable of enlarging the mind of his wife.
when elizabeth had rejoiced over wickhams departure, she found little other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment.
their parties abroad were less varied than before; and at home she had a mother and sister, whose constant repinings at the dulness of everything around them threw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and, though kitty might in time regain her natural degree of sense, since the disturbers of her brain were removed, her other sister, from whose disposition greater evil might be apprehended, was likely to be hardened in all her folly and assurance, by a situation of such double danger as a wateringplace and a camp.
upon the whole, therefore, she found, what has been sometimes found before, that an event to which she had looked forward with impatient desire, did not, in taking place, bring all the satisfaction she had promised herself.
it was consequently necessary to name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity; to have some other point on which her wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the present, and prepare for another disappointment.
her tour to the lakes was now the object of her happiest thoughts: it was her best consolation for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of her mother and kitty made inevitable; and could she have included jane in the scheme, every part of it would have been perfect.
but it is fortunate, thought she, that i have something to wish for.
were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain.
but here, by carrying with me one ceaseless source of regret in my sisters absence, i may reasonably hope to have all my expectations of pleasure realized.
a scheme of which every part promises delight can never be successful; and general disappointment is only warded off by the defence of some little peculiar vexation.
when lydia went away she promised to write very often and very minutely to her mother and kitty; but her letters were always long expected, and always very short.
those to her mother contained little else than that they were just returned from the library, where such and such officers had attended them, and where she had seen such beautiful ornaments as made her quite wild; that she had a new gown, or a new parasol, which she would have described more fully, but was obliged to leave off in a violent hurry, as mrs. forster called her, and they were going to the camp; and from her correspondence with her sister there was still less to be learnt, for her letters to kitty, though rather longer, were much too full of lines under the words to be made public.
after the first fortnight or three weeks of her absence, health, goodhumour, and cheerfulness began to reappear at longbourn.
everything wore a happier aspect.
the families who had been in town for the winter came back again, and summer finery and summer engagements arose.
mrs. bennet was restored to her usual querulous serenity; and by the middle of june kitty was so much recovered as to be able to enter meryton without tears,an event of such happy promise as to make elizabeth hope, that by the following christmas she might be so tolerably reasonable as not to mention an officer above once a day, unless, by some cruel and malicious arrangement at the war office, another regiment should be quartered in meryton.
the time fixed for the beginning of their northern tour was now fast approaching; and a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a letter arrived from mrs. gardiner, which at once delayed its commencement and curtailed its extent.
mr. gardiner would be prevented by business from setting out till a fortnight later in july, and must be in london again within a month; and as that left too short a period for them to go so far, and see so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with the leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give up the lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour; and, according to the present plan, were to go no farther northward than derbyshire.
in that county there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their three weeks; and to mrs. gardiner it had a peculiarly strong attraction.
the town where she had formerly passed some years of her life, and where they were now to spend a few days, was probably as great an object of her curiosity as all the celebrated beauties of matlock, chatsworth, dovedale, or the peak.
elizabeth was excessively disappointed: she had set her heart on seeing the lakes; and still thought there might have been time enough.
but it was her business to be satisfiedand certainly her temper to be happy; and all was soon right again.
with the mention of derbyshire, there were many ideas connected.
it was impossible for her to see the word without thinking of pemberley and its owner.
but surely, said she, i may enter his county with impunity, and rob it of a few petrified spars, without his perceiving me.
the period of expectation was now doubled.
four weeks were to pass away before her uncle and aunts arrival.
but they did pass away, and mr. and mrs. gardiner, with their four children, did at length appear at longbourn.
the children, two girls of six and eight years old, and two younger boys, were to be left under the particular care of their cousin jane, who was the general favourite, and whose steady sense and sweetness of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in every wayteaching them, playing with them, and loving them.
the gardiners stayed only one night at longbourn, and set off the next morning with elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement.
one enjoyment was certainthat of suitableness as companions; a suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear inconveniencescheerfulness to enhance every pleasureand affection and intelligence, which might supply it among themselves if there were disappointments abroad.
it is not the object of this work to give a description of derbyshire, nor of any of the remarkable places through which their route thither layoxford, blenheim, warwick, kenilworth, birmingham, etc., are sufficiently known.
a small part of derbyshire is all the present concern.
to the little town of lambton, the scene of mrs. gardiners former residence, and where she had lately learned that some acquaintance still remained, they bent their steps, after having seen all the principal wonders of the country; and within five miles of lambton, elizabeth found, from her aunt, that pemberley was situated.
it was not in their direct road; nor more than a mile or two out of it.
in talking over their route the evening before, mrs. gardiner expressed an inclination to see the place again.
mr. gardiner declared his willingness, and elizabeth was applied to for her approbation.
my love, should not you like to see a place of which you have heard so much?
said her aunt.
a place, too, with which so many of your acquaintance are connected.
wickham passed all his youth there, you know.
elizabeth was distressed.
she felt that she had no business at pemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing it.
she must own that she was tired of great houses: after going over so many, she really had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains.
mrs. gardiner abused her stupidity.
if it were merely a fine house richly furnished, said she, i should not care about it myself; but the grounds are delightful.
they have some of the finest woods in the country.
elizabeth said no more; but her mind could not acquiesce.
the possibility of meeting mr. darcy, while viewing the place, instantly occurred.
it would be dreadful!
she blushed at the very idea; and thought it would be better to speak openly to her aunt, than to run such a risk.
but against this there were objections; and she finally resolved that it could be the last resource, if her private inquiries as to the absence of the family were unfavourably answered.
accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the chambermaid whether pemberley were not a very fine place, what was the name of its proprietor, and, with no little alarm, whether the family were down for the summer?
a most welcome negative followed the last question; and her alarms being now removed, she was at leisure to feel a great deal of curiosity to see the house herself; and when the subject was revived the next morning, and she was again applied to, could readily answer, and with a proper air of indifference, that she had not really any dislike to the scheme.
to pemberley, therefore, they were to go.
illustration: conjecturing as to the date  chapter xliii.
illustration elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for the first appearance of pemberley woods with some perturbation; and when at length they turned in at the lodge, her spirits were in a high flutter.
the park was very large, and contained great variety of ground.
they entered it in one of its lowest points, and drove for some time through a beautiful wood stretching over a wide extent.
elizabeths mind was too full for conversation, but she saw and admired every remarkable spot and point of view.
they gradually ascended for half a mile, and then found themselves at the top of a considerable eminence, where the wood ceased, and the eye was instantly caught by pemberley house, situated on the opposite side of the valley, into which the road with some abruptness wound.
it was a large, handsome stone building, standing well on rising ground, and backed by a ridge of high woody hills; and in front a stream of some natural importance was swelled into greater, but without any artificial appearance.
its banks were neither formal nor falsely adorned.
elizabeth was delighted.
she had never seen a place for which nature had done more, or where natural beauty had been so little counteracted by an awkward taste.
they were all of them warm in their admiration; and at that moment she felt that to be mistress of pemberley might be something!
they descended the hill, crossed the bridge, and drove to the door; and, while examining the nearer aspect of the house, all her apprehension of meeting its owner returned.
she dreaded lest the chambermaid had been mistaken.
on applying to see the place, they were admitted into the hall; and elizabeth, as they waited for the housekeeper, had leisure to wonder at her being where she was.
the housekeeper came; a respectable looking elderly woman, much less fine, and more civil, than she had any notion of finding her.
they followed her into the diningparlour.
it was a large, wellproportioned room, handsomely fitted up.
elizabeth, after slightly surveying it, went to a window to enjoy its prospect.
the hill, crowned with wood, from which they had descended, receiving increased abruptness from the distance, was a beautiful object.
every disposition of the ground was good; and she looked on the whole scene, the river, the trees scattered on its banks, and the winding of the valley, as far as she could trace it, with delight.
as they passed into other rooms, these objects were taking different positions; but from every window there were beauties to be seen.
the rooms were lofty and handsome, and their furniture suitable to the fortune of their proprietor; but elizabeth saw, with admiration of his taste, that it was neither gaudy nor uselessly fine,with less of splendour, and more real elegance, than the furniture of rosings.
and of this place, thought she, i might have been mistress!
with these rooms i might have now been familiarly acquainted!
instead of viewing them as a stranger, i might have rejoiced in them as my own, and welcomed to them as visitors my uncle and aunt.
but, no, recollecting herself, that could never be; my uncle and aunt would have been lost to me; i should not have been allowed to invite them.
this was a lucky recollectionit saved her from something like regret.
she longed to inquire of the housekeeper whether her master were really absent, but had not courage for it.
at length, however, the question was asked by her uncle; and she turned away with alarm, while mrs. reynolds replied, that he was; adding, but we expect him tomorrow, with a large party of friends.
how rejoiced was elizabeth that their own journey had not by any circumstance been delayed a day!
her aunt now called her to look at a picture.
she approached, and saw the likeness of mr. wickham, suspended, amongst several other miniatures, over the mantelpiece.
her aunt asked her, smilingly, how she liked it.
the housekeeper came forward, and told them it was the picture of a young gentleman, the son of her late masters steward, who had been brought up by him at his own expense.
he is now gone into the army, she added; but i am afraid he has turned out very wild.
mrs. gardiner looked at her niece with a smile, but elizabeth could not return it.
and that, said mrs. reynolds, pointing to another of the miniatures, is my masterand very like him.
it was drawn at the same time as the otherabout eight years ago.
i have heard much of your masters fine person, said mrs. gardiner, looking at the picture; it is a handsome face.
but, lizzy, you can tell us whether it is like or not.
mrs. reynolds respect for elizabeth seemed to increase on this intimation of her knowing her master.
does that young lady know mr. darcy?
elizabeth coloured, and said, a little.
and do not you think him a very handsome gentleman, maam?
yes, very handsome.
i am sure i know none so handsome; but in the gallery upstairs you will see a finer, larger picture of him than this.
this room was my late masters favourite room, and these miniatures are just as they used to be then.
he was very fond of them.
this accounted to elizabeth for mr. wickhams being among them.
mrs. reynolds then directed their attention to one of miss darcy, drawn when she was only eight years old.
and is miss darcy as handsome as her brother?
said mr. gardiner.
oh, yesthe handsomest young lady that ever was seen; and so accomplished!
she plays and sings all day long.
in the next room is a new instrument just come down for hera present from my master: she comes here tomorrow with him.
mr. gardiner, whose manners were easy and pleasant, encouraged her communicativeness by his questions and remarks: mrs. reynolds, either from pride or attachment, had evidently great pleasure in talking of her master and his sister.
is your master much at pemberley in the course of the year?
not so much as i could wish, sir: but i dare say he may spend half his time here; and miss darcy is always down for the summer months.
except, thought elizabeth, when she goes to ramsgate.
if your master would marry, you might see more of him.
yes, sir; but i do not know when that will be.
i do not know who is good enough for him.
mr. and mrs. gardiner smiled.
elizabeth could not help saying, it is very much to his credit, i am sure, that you should think so.
i say no more than the truth, and what everybody will say that knows him, replied the other.
elizabeth thought this was going pretty far; and she listened with increasing astonishment as the housekeeper added, i have never had a cross word from him in my life, and i have known him ever since he was four years old.
this was praise of all others most extraordinary, most opposite to her ideas.
that he was not a goodtempered man had been her firmest opinion.
her keenest attention was awakened: she longed to hear more; and was grateful to her uncle for saying, there are very few people of whom so much can be said.
you are lucky in having such a master.
yes, sir, i know i am.
if i were to go through the world, i could not meet with a better.
but i have always observed, that they who are goodnatured when children, are goodnatured when they grow up; and he was always the sweetest tempered, most generoushearted boy in the world.
elizabeth almost stared at her.
can this be mr. darcy?
thought she.
his father was an excellent man, said mrs. gardiner.
yes, maam, that he was indeed; and his son will be just like himjust as affable to the poor.
elizabeth listened, wondered, doubted, and was impatient for more.
mrs. reynolds could interest her on no other point.
she related the subjects of the pictures, the dimensions of the rooms, and the price of the furniture in vain.
mr. gardiner, highly amused by the kind of family prejudice, to which he attributed her excessive commendation of her master, soon led again to the subject; and she dwelt with energy on his many merits, as they proceeded together up the great staircase.
he is the best landlord, and the best master, said she, that ever lived.
not like the wild young men nowadays, who think of nothing but themselves.
there is not one of his tenants or servants but what will give him a good name.
some people call him proud; but i am sure i never saw anything of it.
to my fancy, it is only because he does not rattle away like other young men.
in what an amiable light does this place him!
thought elizabeth.
this fine account of him, whispered her aunt as they walked, is not quite consistent with his behaviour to our poor friend.
perhaps we might be deceived.
that is not very likely; our authority was too good.
on reaching the spacious lobby above, they were shown into a very pretty sittingroom, lately fitted up with greater elegance and lightness than the apartments below; and were informed that it was but just done to give pleasure to miss darcy, who had taken a liking to the room, when last at pemberley.
he is certainly a good brother, said elizabeth, as she walked towards one of the windows.
mrs. reynolds anticipated miss darcys delight, when she should enter the room.
and this is always the way with him, she added.
whatever can give his sister any pleasure, is sure to be done in a moment.
there is nothing he would not do for her.
the picture gallery, and two or three of the principal bedrooms, were all that remained to be shown.
in the former were many good paintings: but elizabeth knew nothing of the art; and from such as had been already visible below, she had willingly turned to look at some drawings of miss darcys, in crayons, whose subjects were usually more interesting, and also more intelligible.
in the gallery there were many family portraits, but they could have little to fix the attention of a stranger.
elizabeth walked on in quest of the only face whose features would be known to her.
at last it arrested herand she beheld a striking resemblance of mr. darcy, with such a smile over the face, as she remembered to have sometimes seen, when he looked at her.
she stood several minutes before the picture, in earnest contemplation, and returned to it again before they quitted the gallery.
mrs. reynolds informed them, that it had been taken in his fathers lifetime.
there was certainly at this moment, in elizabeths mind, a more gentle sensation towards the original than she had ever felt in the height of their acquaintance.
the commendation bestowed on him by mrs. reynolds was of no trifling nature.
what praise is more valuable than the praise of an intelligent servant?
as a brother, a landlord, a master, she considered how many peoples happiness were in his guardianship!
how much of pleasure or pain it was in his power to bestow!
how much of good or evil must be done by him!
every idea that had been brought forward by the housekeeper was favourable to his character; and as she stood before the canvas, on which he was represented, and fixed his eyes upon herself, she thought of his regard with a deeper sentiment of gratitude than it had ever raised before: she remembered its warmth, and softened its impropriety of expression.
when all of the house that was open to general inspection had been seen, they returned down stairs; and, taking leave of the housekeeper, were consigned over to the gardener, who met them at the hall door.
as they walked across the lawn towards the river, elizabeth turned back to look again; her uncle and aunt stopped also; and while the former was conjecturing as to the date of the building, the owner of it himself suddenly came forward from the road which led behind it to the stables.
they were within twenty yards of each other; and so abrupt was his appearance, that it was impossible to avoid his sight.
their eyes instantly met, and the cheeks of each were overspread with the deepest blush.
he absolutely started, and for a moment seemed immovable from surprise; but shortly recovering himself, advanced towards the party, and spoke to elizabeth, if not in terms of perfect composure, at least of perfect civility.
she had instinctively turned away; but stopping on his approach, received his compliments with an embarrassment impossible to be overcome.
had his first appearance, or his resemblance to the picture they had just been examining, been insufficient to assure the other two that they now saw mr. darcy, the gardeners expression of surprise, on beholding his master, must immediately have told it.
they stood a little aloof while he was talking to their niece, who, astonished and confused, scarcely dared lift her eyes to his face, and knew not what answer she returned to his civil inquiries after her family.
amazed at the alteration of his manner since they last parted, every sentence that he uttered was increasing her embarrassment; and every idea of the impropriety of her being found there recurring to her mind, the few minutes in which they continued together were some of the most uncomfortable of her life.
nor did he seem much more at ease; when he spoke, his accent had none of its usual sedateness; and he repeated his inquiries as to the time of her having left longbourn, and of her stay in derbyshire, so often, and in so hurried a way, as plainly spoke the distraction of his thoughts.
at length, every idea seemed to fail him; and after standing a few moments without saying a word, he suddenly recollected himself, and took leave.
the others then joined her, and expressed their admiration of his figure; but elizabeth heard not a word, and, wholly engrossed by her own feelings, followed them in silence.
she was overpowered by shame and vexation.
her coming there was the most unfortunate, the most illjudged thing in the world!
how strange must it appear to him!
in what a disgraceful light might it not strike so vain a man!
it might seem as if she had purposely thrown herself in his way again!
oh!
why did she come?
or, why did he thus come a day before he was expected?
had they been only ten minutes sooner, they should have been beyond the reach of his discrimination; for it was plain that he was that moment arrived, that moment alighted from his horse or his carriage.
she blushed again and again over the perverseness of the meeting.
and his behaviour, so strikingly altered,what could it mean?
that he should even speak to her was amazing!but to speak with such civility, to inquire after her family!
never in her life had she seen his manners so little dignified, never had he spoken with such gentleness as on this unexpected meeting.
what a contrast did it offer to his last address in rosings park, when he put his letter into her hand!
she knew not what to think, or how to account for it.
they had now entered a beautiful walk by the side of the water, and every step was bringing forward a nobler fall of ground, or a finer reach of the woods to which they were approaching: but it was some time before elizabeth was sensible of any of it; and, though she answered mechanically to the repeated appeals of her uncle and aunt, and seemed to direct her eyes to such objects as they pointed out, she distinguished no part of the scene.
her thoughts were all fixed on that one spot of pemberley house, whichever it might be, where mr. darcy then was.
she longed to know what at that moment was passing in his mind; in what manner he thought of her, and whether, in defiance of everything, she was still dear to him.
perhaps he had been civil only because he felt himself at ease; yet there had been that in his voice, which was not like ease.
whether he had felt more of pain or of pleasure in seeing her, she could not tell, but he certainly had not seen her with composure.
at length, however, the remarks of her companions on her absence of mind roused her, and she felt the necessity of appearing more like herself.
they entered the woods, and, bidding adieu to the river for a while, ascended some of the higher grounds; whence, in spots where the opening of the trees gave the eye power to wander, were many charming views of the valley, the opposite hills, with the long range of woods overspreading many, and occasionally part of the stream.
mr. gardiner expressed a wish of going round the whole park, but feared it might be beyond a walk.
with a triumphant smile, they were told, that it was ten miles round.
it settled the matter; and they pursued the accustomed circuit; which brought them again, after some time, in a descent among hanging woods, to the edge of the water, and one of its narrowest parts.
they crossed it by a simple bridge, in character with the general air of the scene: it was a spot less adorned than any they had yet visited; and the valley, here contracted into a glen, allowed room only for the stream, and a narrow walk amidst the rough coppicewood which bordered it.
elizabeth longed to explore its windings; but when they had crossed the bridge, and perceived their distance from the house, mrs. gardiner, who was not a great walker, could go no farther, and thought only of returning to the carriage as quickly as possible.
her niece was, therefore, obliged to submit, and they took their way towards the house on the opposite side of the river, in the nearest direction; but their progress was slow, for mr. gardiner, though seldom able to indulge the taste, was very fond of fishing, and was so much engaged in watching the occasional appearance of some trout in the water, and talking to the man about them, that he advanced but little.
whilst wandering on in this slow manner, they were again surprised, and elizabeths astonishment was quite equal to what it had been at first, by the sight of mr. darcy approaching them, and at no great distance.
the walk being here less sheltered than on the other side, allowed them to see him before they met.
elizabeth, however astonished, was at least more prepared for an interview than before, and resolved to appear and to speak with calmness, if he really intended to meet them.
for a few moments, indeed, she felt that he would probably strike into some other path.
the idea lasted while a turning in the walk concealed him from their view; the turning past, he was immediately before them.
with a glance she saw that he had lost none of his recent civility; and, to imitate his politeness, she began as they met to admire the beauty of the place; but she had not got beyond the words delightful, and charming, when some unlucky recollections obtruded, and she fancied that praise of pemberley from her might be mischievously construed.
her colour changed, and she said no more.
mrs. gardiner was standing a little behind; and on her pausing, he asked her if she would do him the honour of introducing him to her friends.
this was a stroke of civility for which she was quite unprepared; and she could hardly suppress a smile at his being now seeking the acquaintance of some of those very people, against whom his pride had revolted, in his offer to herself.
what will be his surprise, thought she, when he knows who they are!
he takes them now for people of fashion.
the introduction, however, was immediately made; and as she named their relationship to herself, she stole a sly look at him, to see how he bore it; and was not without the expectation of his decamping as fast as he could from such disgraceful companions.
that he was surprised by the connection was evident: he sustained it, however, with fortitude: and, so far from going away, turned back with them, and entered into conversation with mr. gardiner.
elizabeth could not but be pleased, could not but triumph.
it was consoling that he should know she had some relations for whom there was no need to blush.
she listened most attentively to all that passed between them, and gloried in every expression, every sentence of her uncle, which marked his intelligence, his taste, or his good manners.
the conversation soon turned upon fishing; and she heard mr. darcy invite him, with the greatest civility, to fish there as often as he chose, while he continued in the neighbourhood, offering at the same time to supply him with fishing tackle, and pointing out those parts of the stream where there was usually most sport.
mrs. gardiner, who was walking arm in arm with elizabeth, gave her a look expressive of her wonder.
elizabeth said nothing, but it gratified her exceedingly; the compliment must be all for herself.
her astonishment, however, was extreme; and continually was she repeating, why is he so altered?
from what can it proceed?
it cannot be for me, it cannot be for my sake that his manners are thus softened.
my reproofs at hunsford could not work such a change as this.
it is impossible that he should still love me.
after walking some time in this way, the two ladies in front, the two gentlemen behind, on resuming their places, after descending to the brink of the river for the better inspection of some curious waterplant, there chanced to be a little alteration.
it originated in mrs. gardiner, who, fatigued by the exercise of the morning, found elizabeths arm inadequate to her support, and consequently preferred her husbands.
mr. darcy took her place by her niece, and they walked on together.
after a short silence the lady first spoke.
she wished him to know that she had been assured of his absence before she came to the place, and accordingly began by observing, that his arrival had been very unexpectedfor your housekeeper, she added, informed us that you would certainly not be here till tomorrow; and, indeed, before we left bakewell, we understood that you were not immediately expected in the country.
he acknowledged the truth of it all; and said that business with his steward had occasioned his coming forward a few hours before the rest of the party with whom he had been travelling.
they will join me early tomorrow, he continued, and among them are some who will claim an acquaintance with you,mr.
bingley and his sisters.
elizabeth answered only by a slight bow.
her thoughts were instantly driven back to the time when mr. bingleys name had been last mentioned between them; and if she might judge from his complexion, his mind was not very differently engaged.
there is also one other person in the party, he continued after a pause, who more particularly wishes to be known to you.
will you allow me, or do i ask too much, to introduce my sister to your acquaintance during your stay at lambton?
the surprise of such an application was great indeed; it was too great for her to know in what manner she acceded to it.
she immediately felt that whatever desire miss darcy might have of being acquainted with her, must be the work of her brother, and without looking farther, it was satisfactory; it was gratifying to know that his resentment had not made him think really ill of her.
they now walked on in silence; each of them deep in thought.
elizabeth was not comfortable; that was impossible; but she was flattered and pleased.
his wish of introducing his sister to her was a compliment of the highest kind.
they soon outstripped the others; and when they had reached the carriage, mr. and mrs. gardiner were half a quarter of a mile behind.
he then asked her to walk into the housebut she declared herself not tired, and they stood together on the lawn.
at such a time much might have been said, and silence was very awkward.
she wanted to talk, but there seemed an embargo on every subject.
at last she recollected that she had been travelling, and they talked of matlock and dovedale with great perseverance.
yet time and her aunt moved slowlyand her patience and her ideas were nearly worn out before the ttette was over.
on mr. and mrs. gardiners coming up they were all pressed to go into the house and take some refreshment; but this was declined, and they parted on each side with the utmost politeness.
mr. darcy handed the ladies into the carriage; and when it drove off, elizabeth saw him walking slowly towards the house.
the observations of her uncle and aunt now began; and each of them pronounced him to be infinitely superior to anything they had expected.
he is perfectly wellbehaved, polite, and unassuming, said her uncle.
there is something a little stately in him, to be sure, replied her aunt; but it is confined to his air, and is not unbecoming.
i can now say with the housekeeper, that though some people may call him proud, i have seen nothing of it.
i was never more surprised than by his behaviour to us.
it was more than civil; it was really attentive; and there was no necessity for such attention.
his acquaintance with elizabeth was very trifling.
to be sure, lizzy, said her aunt, he is not so handsome as wickham; or rather he has not wickhams countenance, for his features are perfectly good.
but how came you to tell us that he was so disagreeable?
elizabeth excused herself as well as she could: said that she had liked him better when they met in kent than before, and that she had never seen him so pleasant as this morning.
but perhaps he may be a little whimsical in his civilities, replied her uncle.
your great men often are; and therefore i shall not take him at his word about fishing, as he might change his mind another day, and warn me off his grounds.
elizabeth felt that they had entirely mistaken his character, but said nothing.
from what we have seen of him, continued mrs. gardiner, i really should not have thought that he could have behaved in so cruel a way by anybody as he has done by poor wickham.
he has not an illnatured look.
on the contrary, there is something pleasing about his mouth when he speaks.
and there is something of dignity in his countenance, that would not give one an unfavourable idea of his heart.
but, to be sure, the good lady who showed us the house did give him a most flaming character!
i could hardly help laughing aloud sometimes.
but he is a liberal master, i suppose, and that, in the eye of a servant, comprehends every virtue.
elizabeth here felt herself called on to say something in vindication of his behaviour to wickham; and, therefore, gave them to understand, in as guarded a manner as she could, that by what she had heard from his relations in kent, his actions were capable of a very different construction; and that his character was by no means so faulty, nor wickhams so amiable, as they had been considered in hertfordshire.
in confirmation of this, she related the particulars of all the pecuniary transactions in which they had been connected, without actually naming her authority, but stating it to be such as might be relied on.
mrs. gardiner was surprised and concerned: but as they were now approaching the scene of her former pleasures, every idea gave way to the charm of recollection; and she was too much engaged in pointing out to her husband all the interesting spots in its environs, to think of anything else.
fatigued as she had been by the mornings walk, they had no sooner dined than she set off again in quest of her former acquaintance, and the evening was spent in the satisfactions of an intercourse renewed after many years discontinuance.
the occurrences of the day were too full of interest to leave elizabeth much attention for any of these new friends; and she could do nothing but think, and think with wonder, of mr. darcys civility, and, above all, of his wishing her to be acquainted with his sister.
illustration chapter xliv.
illustration elizabeth had settled it that mr. darcy would bring his sister to visit her the very day after her reaching pemberley; and was, consequently, resolved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of that morning.
but her conclusion was false; for on the very morning after their own arrival at lambton these visitors came.
they had been walking about the place with some of their new friends, and were just returned to the inn to dress themselves for dining with the same family, when the sound of a carriage drew them to a window, and they saw a gentleman and lady in a curricle driving up the street.
elizabeth, immediately recognizing the livery, guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree of surprise to her relations, by acquainting them with the honour which she expected.
her uncle and aunt were all amazement; and the embarrassment of her manner as she spoke, joined to the circumstance itself, and many of the circumstances of the preceding day, opened to them a new idea on the business.
nothing had ever suggested it before, but they now felt that there was no other way of accounting for such attentions from such a quarter than by supposing a partiality for their niece.
while these newlyborn notions were passing in their heads, the perturbation of elizabeths feelings was every moment increasing.
she was quite amazed at her own discomposure; but, amongst other causes of disquiet, she dreaded lest the partiality of the brother should have said too much in her favour; and, more than commonly anxious to please, she naturally suspected that every power of pleasing would fail her.
she retreated from the window, fearful of being seen; and as she walked up and down the room, endeavouring to compose herself, saw such looks of inquiring surprise in her uncle and aunt as made everything worse.
miss darcy and her brother appeared, and this formidable introduction took place.
with astonishment did elizabeth see that her new acquaintance was at least as much embarrassed as herself.
since her being at lambton, she had heard that miss darcy was exceedingly proud; but the observation of a very few minutes convinced her that she was only exceedingly shy.
she found it difficult to obtain even a word from her beyond a monosyllable.
miss darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than elizabeth; and, though little more than sixteen, her figure was formed, and her appearance womanly and graceful.
she was less handsome than her brother, but there was sense and goodhumour in her face, and her manners were perfectly unassuming and gentle.
elizabeth, who had expected to find in her as acute and unembarrassed an observer as ever mr. darcy had been, was much relieved by discerning such different feelings.
they had not been long together before darcy told her that bingley was also coming to wait on her; and she had barely time to express her satisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, when bingleys quick step was heard on the stairs, and in a moment he entered the room.
all elizabeths anger against him had been long done away; but had she still felt any, it could hardly have stood its ground against the unaffected cordiality with which he expressed himself on seeing her again.
he inquired in a friendly, though general, way, after her family, and looked and spoke with the same goodhumoured ease that he had ever done.
to mr. and mrs. gardiner he was scarcely a less interesting personage than to herself.
they had long wished to see him.
the whole party before them, indeed, excited a lively attention.
the suspicions which had just arisen of mr. darcy and their niece, directed their observation towards each with an earnest, though guarded, inquiry; and they soon drew from those inquiries the full conviction that one of them at least knew what it was to love.
of the ladys sensations they remained a little in doubt; but that the gentleman was overflowing with admiration was evident enough.
elizabeth, on her side, had much to do.
she wanted to ascertain the feelings of each of her visitors, she wanted to compose her own, and to make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where she feared most to fail, she was most sure of success, for those to whom she endeavoured to give pleasure were prepossessed in her favour.
bingley was ready, georgiana was eager, and darcy determined, to be pleased.
illustration: to make herself agreeable to all copyright 1894 by george allen.
in seeing bingley, her thoughts naturally flew to her sister; and oh!
how ardently did she long to know whether any of his were directed in a like manner.
sometimes she could fancy that he talked less than on former occasions, and once or twice pleased herself with the notion that, as he looked at her, he was trying to trace a resemblance.
but, though this might be imaginary, she could not be deceived as to his behaviour to miss darcy, who had been set up as a rival to jane.
no look appeared on either side that spoke particular regard.
nothing occurred between them that could justify the hopes of his sister.
on this point she was soon satisfied; and two or three little circumstances occurred ere they parted, which, in her anxious interpretation, denoted a recollection of jane, not untinctured by tenderness, and a wish of saying more that might lead to the mention of her, had he dared.
he observed to her, at a moment when the others were talking together, and in a tone which had something of real regret, that it was a very long time since he had had the pleasure of seeing her; and, before she could reply, he added, it is above eight months.
we have not met since the 26th of november, when we were all dancing together at netherfield.
elizabeth was pleased to find his memory so exact; and he afterwards took occasion to ask her, when unattended to by any of the rest, whether all her sisters were at longbourn.
there was not much in the question, nor in the preceding remark; but there was a look and a manner which gave them meaning.
it was not often that she could turn her eyes on mr. darcy himself; but whenever she did catch a glimpse she saw an expression of general complaisance, and in all that he said, she heard an accent so far removed from hauteur or disdain of his companions, as convinced her that the improvement of manners which she had yesterday witnessed, however temporary its existence might prove, had at least outlived one day.
when she saw him thus seeking the acquaintance, and courting the good opinion of people with whom any intercourse a few months ago would have been a disgrace; when she saw him thus civil, not only to herself, but to the very relations whom he had openly disdained, and recollected their last lively scene in hunsford parsonage, the difference, the change was so great, and struck so forcibly on her mind, that she could hardly restrain her astonishment from being visible.
never, even in the company of his dear friends at netherfield, or his dignified relations at rosings, had she seen him so desirous to please, so free from selfconsequence or unbending reserve, as now, when no importance could result from the success of his endeavours, and when even the acquaintance of those to whom his attentions were addressed, would draw down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of netherfield and rosings.
their visitors stayed with them above half an hour; and when they arose to depart, mr. darcy called on his sister to join him in expressing their wish of seeing mr. and mrs. gardiner, and miss bennet, to dinner at pemberley, before they left the country.
miss darcy, though with a diffidence which marked her little in the habit of giving invitations, readily obeyed.
mrs. gardiner looked at her niece, desirous of knowing how she, whom the invitation most concerned, felt disposed as to its acceptance, but elizabeth had turned away her head.
presuming, however, that this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment than any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in her husband, who was fond of society, a perfect willingness to accept it, she ventured to engage for her attendance, and the day after the next was fixed on.
bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing elizabeth again, having still a great deal to say to her, and many inquiries to make after all their hertfordshire friends.
elizabeth, construing all this into a wish of hearing her speak of her sister, was pleased; and on this account, as well as some others, found herself, when their visitors left them, capable of considering the last half hour with some satisfaction, though while it was passing the enjoyment of it had been little.
eager to be alone, and fearful of inquiries or hints from her uncle and aunt, she stayed with them only long enough to hear their favourable opinion of bingley, and then hurried away to dress.
but she had no reason to fear mr. and mrs. gardiners curiosity; it was not their wish to force her communication.
it was evident that she was much better acquainted with mr. darcy than they had before any idea of; it was evident that he was very much in love with her.
they saw much to interest, but nothing to justify inquiry.
of mr. darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well; and, as far as their acquaintance reached, there was no fault to find.
they could not be untouched by his politeness; and had they drawn his character from their own feelings and his servants report, without any reference to any other account, the circle in hertfordshire to which he was known would not have recognized it for mr. darcy.
there was now an interest, however, in believing the housekeeper; and they soon became sensible that the authority of a servant, who had known him since he was four years old, and whose own manners indicated respectability, was not to be hastily rejected.
neither had anything occurred in the intelligence of their lambton friends that could materially lessen its weight.
they had nothing to accuse him of but pride; pride he probably had, and if not, it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of a small market town where the family did not visit.
it was acknowledged, however, that he was a liberal man, and did much good among the poor.
with respect to wickham, the travellers soon found that he was not held there in much estimation; for though the chief of his concerns with the son of his patron were imperfectly understood, it was yet a wellknown fact that, on his quitting derbyshire, he had left many debts behind him, which mr. darcy afterwards discharged.
as for elizabeth, her thoughts were at pemberley this evening more than the last; and the evening, though as it passed it seemed long, was not long enough to determine her feelings towards one in that mansion; and she lay awake two whole hours, endeavouring to make them out.
she certainly did not hate him.
no; hatred had vanished long ago, and she had almost as long been ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against him, that could be so called.
the respect created by the conviction of his valuable qualities, though at first unwillingly admitted, had for some time ceased to be repugnant to her feelings; and it was now heightened into somewhat of a friendlier nature by the testimony so highly in his favour, and bringing forward his disposition in so amiable a light, which yesterday had produced.
but above all, above respect and esteem, there was a motive within her of goodwill which could not be overlooked.
it was gratitude;gratitude, not merely for having once loved her, but for loving her still well enough to forgive all the petulance and acrimony of her manner in rejecting him, and all the unjust accusations accompanying her rejection.
he who, she had been persuaded, would avoid her as his greatest enemy, seemed, on this accidental meeting, most eager to preserve the acquaintance; and without any indelicate display of regard, or any peculiarity of manner, where their two selves only were concerned, was soliciting the good opinion of her friends, and bent on making her known to his sister.
such a change in a man of so much pride excited not only astonishment but gratitudefor to love, ardent love, it must be attributed; and, as such, its impression on her was of a sort to be encouraged, as by no means unpleasing, though it could not be exactly defined.
she respected, she esteemed, she was grateful to him, she felt a real interest in his welfare; and she only wanted to know how far she wished that welfare to depend upon herself, and how far it would be for the happiness of both that she should employ the power, which her fancy told her she still possessed, of bringing on the renewal of his addresses.
it had been settled in the evening, between the aunt and niece, that such a striking civility as miss darcys, in coming to them on the very day of her arrival at pemberleyfor she had reached it only to a late breakfastought to be imitated, though it could not be equalled, by some exertion of politeness on their side; and, consequently, that it would be highly expedient to wait on her at pemberley the following morning.
they were, therefore, to go.
elizabeth was pleased; though when she asked herself the reason, she had very little to say in reply.
mr. gardiner left them soon after breakfast.
the fishing scheme had been renewed the day before, and a positive engagement made of his meeting some of the gentlemen at pemberley by noon.
illustration: engaged by the river  chapter xlv.
illustration convinced as elizabeth now was that miss bingleys dislike of her had originated in jealousy, she could not help feeling how very unwelcome her appearance at pemberley must be to her, and was curious to know with how much civility on that ladys side the acquaintance would now be renewed.
on reaching the house, they were shown through the hall into the saloon, whose northern aspect rendered it delightful for summer.
its windows, opening to the ground, admitted a most refreshing view of the high woody hills behind the house, and of the beautiful oaks and spanish chestnuts which were scattered over the intermediate lawn.
in this room they were received by miss darcy, who was sitting there with mrs. hurst and miss bingley, and the lady with whom she lived in london.
georgianas reception of them was very civil, but attended with all that embarrassment which, though proceeding from shyness and the fear of doing wrong, would easily give to those who felt themselves inferior the belief of her being proud and reserved.
mrs. gardiner and her niece, however, did her justice, and pitied her.
by mrs. hurst and miss bingley they were noticed only by a courtesy; and on their being seated, a pause, awkward as such pauses must always be, succeeded for a few moments.
it was first broken by mrs. annesley, a genteel, agreeablelooking woman, whose endeavour to introduce some kind of discourse proved her to be more truly wellbred than either of the others; and between her and mrs. gardiner, with occasional help from elizabeth, the conversation was carried on.
miss darcy looked as if she wished for courage enough to join in it; and sometimes did venture a short sentence, when there was least danger of its being heard.
elizabeth soon saw that she was herself closely watched by miss bingley, and that she could not speak a word, especially to miss darcy, without calling her attention.
this observation would not have prevented her from trying to talk to the latter, had they not been seated at an inconvenient distance; but she was not sorry to be spared the necessity of saying much: her own thoughts were employing her.
she expected every moment that some of the gentlemen would enter the room: she wished, she feared, that the master of the house might be amongst them; and whether she wished or feared it most, she could scarcely determine.
after sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour, without hearing miss bingleys voice, elizabeth was roused by receiving from her a cold inquiry after the health of her family.
she answered with equal indifference and brevity, and the other said no more.
the next variation which their visit afforded was produced by the entrance of servants with cold meat, cake, and a variety of all the finest fruits in season; but this did not take place till after many a significant look and smile from mrs. annesley to miss darcy had been given, to remind her of her post.
there was now employment for the whole party; for though they could not all talk, they could all eat; and the beautiful pyramids of grapes, nectarines, and peaches, soon collected them round the table.
while thus engaged, elizabeth had a fair opportunity of deciding whether she most feared or wished for the appearance of mr. darcy, by the feelings which prevailed on his entering the room; and then, though but a moment before she had believed her wishes to predominate, she began to regret that he came.
he had been some time with mr. gardiner, who, with two or three other gentlemen from the house, was engaged by the river; and had left him only on learning that the ladies of the family intended a visit to georgiana that morning.
no sooner did he appear, than elizabeth wisely resolved to be perfectly easy and unembarrassed;a resolution the more necessary to be made, but perhaps not the more easily kept, because she saw that the suspicions of the whole party were awakened against them, and that there was scarcely an eye which did not watch his behaviour when he first came into the room.
in no countenance was attentive curiosity so strongly marked as in miss bingleys, in spite of the smiles which overspread her face whenever she spoke to one of its objects; for jealousy had not yet made her desperate, and her attentions to mr. darcy were by no means over.
miss darcy, on her brothers entrance, exerted herself much more to talk; and elizabeth saw that he was anxious for his sister and herself to get acquainted, and forwarded, as much as possible, every attempt at conversation on either side.
miss bingley saw all this likewise; and, in the imprudence of anger, took the first opportunity of saying, with sneering civility, pray, miss eliza, are not the shire militia removed from meryton?
they must be a great loss to your family.
in darcys presence she dared not mention wickhams name: but elizabeth instantly comprehended that he was uppermost in her thoughts; and the various recollections connected with him gave her a moments distress; but, exerting herself vigorously to repel the illnatured attack, she presently answered the question in a tolerably disengaged tone.
while she spoke, an involuntary glance showed her darcy with a heightened complexion, earnestly looking at her, and his sister overcome with confusion, and unable to lift up her eyes.
had miss bingley known what pain she was then giving her beloved friend, she undoubtedly would have refrained from the hint; but she had merely intended to discompose elizabeth, by bringing forward the idea of a man to whom she believed her partial, to make her betray a sensibility which might injure her in darcys opinion, and, perhaps, to remind the latter of all the follies and absurdities by which some part of her family were connected with that corps.
not a syllable had ever reached her of miss darcys meditated elopement.
to no creature had it been revealed, where secrecy was possible, except to elizabeth; and from all bingleys connections her brother was particularly anxious to conceal it, from that very wish which elizabeth had long ago attributed to him, of their becoming hereafter her own.
he had certainly formed such a plan; and without meaning that it should affect his endeavour to separate him from miss bennet, it is probable that it might add something to his lively concern for the welfare of his friend.
elizabeths collected behaviour, however, soon quieted his emotion; and as miss bingley, vexed and disappointed, dared not approach nearer to wickham, georgiana also recovered in time, though not enough to be able to speak any more.
her brother, whose eye she feared to meet, scarcely recollected her interest in the affair; and the very circumstance which had been designed to turn his thoughts from elizabeth, seemed to have fixed them on her more and more cheerfully.
their visit did not continue long after the question and answer above mentioned; and while mr. darcy was attending them to their carriage, miss bingley was venting her feelings in criticisms on elizabeths person, behaviour, and dress.
but georgiana would not join her.
her brothers recommendation was enough to insure her favour: his judgment could not err; and he had spoken in such terms of elizabeth, as to leave georgiana without the power of finding her otherwise than lovely and amiable.
when darcy returned to the saloon, miss bingley could not help repeating to him some part of what she had been saying to his sister.
how very ill eliza bennet looks this morning, mr. darcy, she cried: i never in my life saw anyone so much altered as she is since the winter.
she is grown so brown and coarse!
louisa and i were agreeing that we should not have known her again.
however little mr. darcy might have liked such an address, he contented himself with coolly replying, that he perceived no other alteration than her being rather tanned,no miraculous consequence of travelling in the summer.
for my own part, she rejoined, i must confess that i never could see any beauty in her.
her face is too thin; her complexion has no brilliancy; and her features are not at all handsome.
her nose wants character; there is nothing marked in its lines.
her teeth are tolerable, but not out of the common way; and as for her eyes, which have sometimes been called so fine, i never could perceive anything extraordinary in them.
they have a sharp, shrewish look, which i do not like at all; and in her air altogether, there is a selfsufficiency without fashion, which is intolerable.
persuaded as miss bingley was that darcy admired elizabeth, this was not the best method of recommending herself; but angry people are not always wise; and in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she had all the success she expected.
he was resolutely silent, however; and, from a determination of making him speak, she continued, i remember, when we first knew her in hertfordshire, how amazed we all were to find that she was a reputed beauty; and i particularly recollect your saying one night, after they had been dining at netherfield, she a beauty!
i should as soon call her mother a wit.
but afterwards she seemed to improve on you, and i believe you thought her rather pretty at one time.
yes, replied darcy, who could contain himself no longer, but that was only when i first knew her; for it is many months since i have considered her as one of the handsomest women of my acquaintance.
he then went away, and miss bingley was left to all the satisfaction of having forced him to say what gave no one any pain but herself.
mrs. gardiner and elizabeth talked of all that had occurred during their visit, as they returned, except what had particularly interested them both.
the looks and behaviour of everybody they had seen were discussed, except of the person who had mostly engaged their attention.
they talked of his sister, his friends, his house, his fruit, of everything but himself; yet elizabeth was longing to know what mrs. gardiner thought of him, and mrs. gardiner would have been highly gratified by her nieces beginning the subject.
illustration chapter xlvi.
illustration elizabeth had been a good deal disappointed in not finding a letter from jane on their first arrival at lambton; and this disappointment had been renewed on each of the mornings that had now been spent there; but on the third her repining was over, and her sister justified, by the receipt of two letters from her at once, on one of which was marked that it had been missent elsewhere.
elizabeth was not surprised at it, as jane had written the direction remarkably ill. they had just been preparing to walk as the letters came in; and her uncle and aunt, leaving her to enjoy them in quiet, set off by themselves.
the one missent must be first attended to; it had been written five days ago.
the beginning contained an account of all their little parties and engagements, with such news as the country afforded; but the latter half, which was dated a day later, and written in evident agitation, gave more important intelligence.
it was to this effect: since writing the above, dearest lizzy, something has occurred of a most unexpected and serious nature; but i am afraid of alarming yoube assured that we are all well.
what i have to say relates to poor lydia.
an express came at twelve last night, just as we were all gone to bed, from colonel forster, to inform us that she was gone off to scotland with one of his officers; to own the truth, with wickham!
imagine our surprise.
to kitty, however, it does not seem so wholly unexpected.
i am very, very sorry.
so imprudent a match on both sides!
but i am willing to hope the best, and that his character has been misunderstood.
thoughtless and indiscreet i can easily believe him, but this step (and let us rejoice over it) marks nothing bad at heart.
his choice is disinterested at least, for he must know my father can give her nothing.
our poor mother is sadly grieved.
my father bears it better.
how thankful am i, that we never let them know what has been said against him; we must forget it ourselves.
they were off saturday night about twelve, as is conjectured, but were not missed till yesterday morning at eight.
the express was sent off directly.
my dear lizzy, they must have passed within ten miles of us.
colonel forster gives us reason to expect him here soon.
lydia left a few lines for his wife, informing her of their intention.
i must conclude, for i cannot be long from my poor mother.
i am afraid you will not be able to make it out, but i hardly know what i have written.
without allowing herself time for consideration, and scarcely knowing what she felt, elizabeth, on finishing this letter, instantly seized the other, and opening it with the utmost impatience, read as follows: it had been written a day later than the conclusion of the first.
by this time, my dearest sister, you have received my hurried letter; i wish this may be more intelligible, but though not confined for time, my head is so bewildered that i cannot answer for being coherent.
dearest lizzy, i hardly know what i would write, but i have bad news for you, and it cannot be delayed.
imprudent as a marriage between mr. wickham and our poor lydia would be, we are now anxious to be assured it has taken place, for there is but too much reason to fear they are not gone to scotland.
colonel forster came yesterday, having left brighton the day before, not many hours after the express.
though lydias short letter to mrs. f. gave them to understand that they were going to gretna green, something was dropped by denny expressing his belief that w. never intended to go there, or to marry lydia at all, which was repeated to colonel f., who, instantly taking the alarm, set off from b., intending to trace their route.
he did trace them easily to clapham, but no farther; for on entering that place, they removed into a hackneycoach, and dismissed the chaise that brought them from epsom.
all that is known after this is, that they were seen to continue the london road.
i know not what to think.
after making every possible inquiry on that side of london, colonel f. came on into hertfordshire, anxiously renewing them at all the turnpikes, and at the inns in barnet and hatfield, but without any success,no such people had been seen to pass through.
with the kindest concern he came on to longbourn, and broke his apprehensions to us in a manner most creditable to his heart.
i am sincerely grieved for him and mrs. f.; but no one can throw any blame on them.
our distress, my dear lizzy, is very great.
my father and mother believe the worst, but i cannot think so ill of him.
many circumstances might make it more eligible for them to be married privately in town than to pursue their first plan; and even if he could form such a design against a young woman of lydias connections, which is not likely, can i suppose her so lost to everything?
impossible!
i grieve to find, however, that colonel f. is not disposed to depend upon their marriage: he shook his head when i expressed my hopes, and said he feared w. was not a man to be trusted.
my poor mother is really ill, and keeps her room.
could she exert herself, it would be better, but this is not to be expected; and as to my father, i never in my life saw him so affected.
poor kitty has anger for having concealed their attachment; but as it was a matter of confidence, one cannot wonder.
i am truly glad, dearest lizzy, that you have been spared something of these distressing scenes; but now, as the first shock is over, shall i own that i long for your return?
i am not so selfish, however, as to press for it, if inconvenient.
adieu!
i take up my pen again to do, what i have just told you i would not; but circumstances are such, that i cannot help earnestly begging you all to come here as soon as possible.
i know my dear uncle and aunt so well, that i am not afraid of requesting it, though i have still something more to ask of the former.
my father is going to london with colonel forster instantly, to try to discover her.
what he means to do, i am sure i know not; but his excessive distress will not allow him to pursue any measure in the best and safest way, and colonel forster is obliged to be at brighton again tomorrow evening.
in such an exigence my uncles advice and assistance would be everything in the world; he will immediately comprehend what i must feel, and i rely upon his goodness.
oh!
where, where is my uncle?
cried elizabeth, darting from her seat as she finished the letter, in eagerness to follow him, without losing a moment of the time so precious; but as she reached the door, it was opened by a servant, and mr. darcy appeared.
her pale face and impetuous manner made him start, and before he could recover himself enough to speak, she, in whose mind every idea was superseded by lydias situation, hastily exclaimed, i beg your pardon, but i must leave you.
i must find mr. gardiner this moment on business that cannot be delayed; i have not an instant to lose.
good god!
what is the matter?
cried he, with more feeling than politeness; then recollecting himself, i will not detain you a minute; but let me, or let the servant, go after mr. and mrs. gardiner.
you are not well enough; you cannot go yourself.
elizabeth hesitated; but her knees trembled under her, and she felt how little would be gained by her attempting to pursue them.
calling back the servant, therefore, she commissioned him, though in so breathless an accent as made her almost unintelligible, to fetch his master and mistress home instantly.
on his quitting the room, she sat down, unable to support herself, and looking so miserably ill, that it was impossible for darcy to leave her, or to refrain from saying, in a tone of gentleness and commiseration, let me call your maid.
is there nothing you could take to give you present relief?
a glass of wine; shall i get you one?
you are very ill. no, i thank you, she replied, endeavouring to recover herself.
there is nothing the matter with me.
i am quite well, i am only distressed by some dreadful news which i have just received from longbourn.
she burst into tears as she alluded to it, and for a few minutes could not speak another word.
darcy, in wretched suspense, could only say something indistinctly of his illustration: i have not an instant to lose  concern, and observe her in compassionate silence.
at length she spoke again.
i have just had a letter from jane, with such dreadful news.
it cannot be concealed from anyone.
my youngest sister has left all her friendshas eloped; has thrown herself into the power ofof mr. wickham.
they are gone off together from brighton.
you know him too well to doubt the rest.
she has no money, no connections, nothing that can tempt him toshe is lost for ever.
darcy was fixed in astonishment.
when i consider, she added, in a yet more agitated voice, that i might have prevented it!
i who knew what he was.
had i but explained some part of it onlysome part of what i learnt, to my own family!
had his character been known, this could not have happened.
but it is all, all too late now.
i am grieved, indeed, cried darcy: grievedshocked.
but is it certain, absolutely certain?
oh, yes!
they left brighton together on sunday night, and were traced almost to london, but not beyond: they are certainly not gone to scotland.
and what has been done, what has been attempted, to recover her?
my father has gone to london, and jane has written to beg my uncles immediate assistance, and we shall be off, i hope, in half an hour.
but nothing can be done; i know very well that nothing can be done.
how is such a man to be worked on?
how are they even to be discovered?
i have not the smallest hope.
it is every way horrible!
darcy shook his head in silent acquiescence.
when my eyes were opened to his real character, oh!
had i known what i ought, what i dared to do!
but i knew noti was afraid of doing too much.
wretched, wretched mistake!
darcy made no answer.
he seemed scarcely to hear her, and was walking up and down the room in earnest meditation; his brow contracted, his air gloomy.
elizabeth soon observed, and instantly understood it.
her power was sinking; everything must sink under such a proof of family weakness, such an assurance of the deepest disgrace.
she could neither wonder nor condemn; but the belief of his selfconquest brought nothing consolatory to her bosom, afforded no palliation of her distress.
it was, on the contrary, exactly calculated to make her understand her own wishes; and never had she so honestly felt that she could have loved him, as now, when all love must be vain.
but self, though it would intrude, could not engross her.
lydiathe humiliation, the misery she was bringing on them allsoon swallowed up every private care; and covering her face with her handkerchief, elizabeth was soon lost to everything else; and, after a pause of several minutes, was only recalled to a sense of her situation by the voice of her companion, who, in a manner which, though it spoke compassion, spoke likewise restraint, said, i am afraid you have been long desiring my absence, nor have i anything to plead in excuse of my stay, but real, though unavailing concern.
would to heaven that anything could be either said or done on my part, that might offer consolation to such distress!
but i will not torment you with vain wishes, which may seem purposely to ask for your thanks.
this unfortunate affair will, i fear, prevent my sisters having the pleasure of seeing you at pemberley today.
oh, yes!
be so kind as to apologize for us to miss darcy.
say that urgent business calls us home immediately.
conceal the unhappy truth as long as it is possible.
i know it cannot be long.
he readily assured her of his secrecy, again expressed his sorrow for her distress, wished it a happier conclusion than there was at present reason to hope, and, leaving his compliments for her relations, with only one serious parting look, went away.
as he quitted the room, elizabeth felt how improbable it was that they should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality as had marked their several meetings in derbyshire; and as she threw a retrospective glance over the whole of their acquaintance, so full of contradictions and varieties, sighed at the perverseness of those feelings which would now have promoted its continuance, and would formerly have rejoiced in its termination.
if gratitude and esteem are good foundations of affection, elizabeths change of sentiment will be neither improbable nor faulty.
but if otherwise, if the regard springing from such sources is unreasonable or unnatural, in comparison of what is so often described as arising on a first interview with its object, and even before two words have been exchanged, nothing can be said in her defence, except that she had given somewhat of a trial to the latter method, in her partiality for wickham, and that its ill success might, perhaps, authorize her to seek the other less interesting mode of attachment.
be that as it may, she saw him go with regret; and in this early example of what lydias infamy must produce, found additional anguish as she reflected on that wretched business.
never since reading janes second letter had she entertained a hope of wickhams meaning to marry her.
no one but jane, she thought, could flatter herself with such an expectation.
surprise was the least of all her feelings on this development.
while the contents of the first letter remained on her mind, she was all surprise, all astonishment, that wickham should marry a girl whom it was impossible he could marry for money; and how lydia could ever have attached him had appeared incomprehensible.
but now it was all too natural.
for such an attachment as this, she might have sufficient charms; and though she did not suppose lydia to be deliberately engaging in an elopement, without the intention of marriage, she had no difficulty in believing that neither her virtue nor her understanding would preserve her from falling an easy prey.
she had never perceived, while the regiment was in hertfordshire, that lydia had any partiality for him; but she was convinced that lydia had wanted only encouragement to attach herself to anybody.
sometimes one officer, sometimes another, had been her favourite, as their attentions raised them in her opinion.
her affections had been continually fluctuating, but never without an object.
the mischief of neglect and mistaken indulgence towards such a girloh!
how acutely did she now feel it!
she was wild to be at hometo hear, to see, to be upon the spot to share with jane in the cares that must now fall wholly upon her, in a family so deranged; a father absent, a mother incapable of exertion, and requiring constant attendance; and though almost persuaded that nothing could be done for lydia, her uncles interference seemed of the utmost importance, and till he entered the room the misery of her impatience was severe.
mr. and mrs. gardiner had hurried back in alarm, supposing, by the servants account, that their niece was taken suddenly ill; but satisfying them instantly on that head, she eagerly communicated the cause of their summons, reading the two letters aloud, and dwelling on the postscript of the last with trembling energy.
though lydia had never been a favourite with them, mr. and mrs. gardiner could not but be deeply affected.
not lydia only, but all were concerned in it; and after the first exclamations of surprise and horror, mr. gardiner readily promised every assistance in his power.
elizabeth, though expecting no less, thanked him with tears of gratitude; and all three being actuated by one spirit, everything relating to their journey was speedily settled.
they were to be off as soon as possible.
but what is to be done about pemberley?
cried mrs. gardiner.
john told us mr. darcy was here when you sent for us;was it so?
yes; and i told him we should not be able to keep our engagement.
that is all settled.
what is all settled?
repeated the other, as she ran into her room to prepare.
and are they upon such terms as for her to disclose the real truth?
oh, that i knew how it was!
but wishes were vain; or, at best, could serve only to amuse her in the hurry and confusion of the following hour.
had elizabeth been at leisure to be idle, she would have remained certain that all employment was impossible to one so wretched as herself; but she had her share of business as well as her aunt, and amongst the rest there were notes to be written to all their friends at lambton, with false excuses for their sudden departure.
an hour, however, saw the whole completed; and mr. gardiner, meanwhile, having settled his account at the inn, nothing remained to be done but to go; and elizabeth, after all the misery of the morning, found herself, in a shorter space of time than she could have supposed, seated in the carriage, and on the road to longbourn.
illustration: the first pleasing earnest of their welcome  chapter xlvii.
illustration i have been thinking it over again, elizabeth, said her uncle, as they drove from the town; and really, upon serious consideration, i am much more inclined than i was to judge as your eldest sister does of the matter.
it appears to me so very unlikely that any young man should form such a design against a girl who is by no means unprotected or friendless, and who was actually staying in his colonels family, that i am strongly inclined to hope the best.
could he expect that her friends would not step forward?
could he expect to be noticed again by the regiment, after such an affront to colonel forster?
his temptation is not adequate to the risk.
do you really think so?
cried elizabeth, brightening up for a moment.
upon my word, said mrs. gardiner, i begin to be of your uncles opinion.
it is really too great a violation of decency, honour, and interest, for him to be guilty of it.
i cannot think so very ill of wickham.
can you, yourself, lizzie, so wholly give him up, as to believe him capable of it?
not perhaps of neglecting his own interest.
but of every other neglect i can believe him capable.
if, indeed, it should be so!
but i dare not hope it.
why should they not go on to scotland, if that had been the case?
in the first place, replied mr. gardiner, there is no absolute proof that they are not gone to scotland.
oh, but their removing from the chaise into a hackney coach is such a presumption!
and, besides, no traces of them were to be found on the barnet road.
well, then,supposing them to be in londonthey may be there, though for the purpose of concealment, for no more exceptionable purpose.
it is not likely that money should be very abundant on either side; and it might strike them that they could be more economically, though less expeditiously, married in london, than in scotland.
but why all this secrecy?
why any fear of detection?
why must their marriage be private?
oh, no, nothis is not likely.
his most particular friend, you see by janes account, was persuaded of his never intending to marry her.
wickham will never marry a woman without some money.
he cannot afford it.
and what claims has lydia, what attractions has she beyond youth, health, and good humour, that could make him for her sake forego every chance of benefiting himself by marrying well?
as to what restraint the apprehensions of disgrace in the corps might throw on a dishonourable elopement with her, i am not able to judge; for i know nothing of the effects that such a step might produce.
but as to your other objection, i am afraid it will hardly hold good.
lydia has no brothers to step forward; and he might imagine, from my fathers behaviour, from his indolence and the little attention he has ever seemed to give to what was going forward in his family, that he would do as little and think as little about it, as any father could do, in such a matter.
but can you think that lydia is so lost to everything but love of him, as to consent to live with him on any other terms than marriage?
it does seem, and it is most shocking, indeed, replied elizabeth, with tears in her eyes, that a sisters sense of decency and virtue in such a point should admit of doubt.
but, really, i know not what to say.
perhaps i am not doing her justice.
but she is very young: she has never been taught to think on serious subjects; and for the last half year, nay, for a twelvemonth, she has been given up to nothing but amusement and vanity.
she has been allowed to dispose of her time in the most idle and frivolous manner, and to adopt any opinions that came in her way.
since the shire were first quartered in meryton, nothing but love, flirtation, and officers, have been in her head.
she has been doing everything in her power, by thinking and talking on the subject, to give greaterwhat shall i call it?susceptibility to her feelings; which are naturally lively enough.
and we all know that wickham has every charm of person and address that can captivate a woman.
but you see that jane, said her aunt, does not think so ill of wickham, as to believe him capable of the attempt.
of whom does jane ever think ill?
and who is there, whatever might be their former conduct, that she would believe capable of such an attempt, till it were proved against them?
but jane knows, as well as i do, what wickham really is.
we both know that he has been profligate in every sense of the word; that he has neither integrity nor honour; that he is as false and deceitful as he is insinuating.
and do you really know all this?
cried mrs. gardiner, whose curiosity as to the mode of her intelligence was all alive.
i do, indeed, replied elizabeth, colouring.
i told you the other day of his infamous behaviour to mr. darcy; and you, yourself, when last at longbourn, heard in what manner he spoke of the man who had behaved with such forbearance and liberality towards him.
and there are other circumstances which i am not at libertywhich it is not worth while to relate; but his lies about the whole pemberley family are endless.
from what he said of miss darcy, i was thoroughly prepared to see a proud, reserved, disagreeable girl.
yet he knew to the contrary himself.
he must know that she was as amiable and unpretending as we have found her.
but does lydia know nothing of this?
can she be ignorant of what you and jane seem so well to understand?
oh, yes!that, that is the worst of all.
till i was in kent, and saw so much both of mr. darcy and his relation colonel fitzwilliam, i was ignorant of the truth myself.
and when i returned home the shire was to leave meryton in a week or fortnights time.
as that was the case, neither jane, to whom i related the whole, nor i, thought it necessary to make our knowledge public; for of what use could it apparently be to anyone, that the good opinion, which all the neighbourhood had of him, should then be overthrown?
and even when it was settled that lydia should go with mrs. forster, the necessity of opening her eyes to his character never occurred to me.
that she could be in any danger from the deception never entered my head.
that such a consequence as this should ensue, you may easily believe was far enough from my thoughts.
when they all removed to brighton, therefore, you had no reason, i suppose, to believe them fond of each other?
not the slightest.
i can remember no symptom of affection on either side; and had anything of the kind been perceptible, you must be aware that ours is not a family on which it could be thrown away.
when first he entered the corps, she was ready enough to admire him; but so we all were.
every girl in or near meryton was out of her senses about him for the first two months: but he never distinguished her by any particular attention; and, consequently, after a moderate period of extravagant and wild admiration, her fancy for him gave way, and others of the regiment, who treated her with more distinction, again became her favourites.
it may be easily believed, that however little of novelty could be added to their fears, hopes, and conjectures, on this interesting subject by its repeated discussion, no other could detain them from it long, during the whole of the journey.
from elizabeths thoughts it was never absent.
fixed there by the keenest of all anguish, selfreproach, she could find no interval of ease or forgetfulness.
they travelled as expeditiously as possible; and sleeping one night on the road, reached longbourn by dinnertime the next day.
it was a comfort to elizabeth to consider that jane could not have been wearied by long expectations.
the little gardiners, attracted by the sight of a chaise, were standing on the steps of the house, as they entered the paddock; and when the carriage drove up to the door, the joyful surprise that lighted up their faces and displayed itself over their whole bodies, in a variety of capers and frisks, was the first pleasing earnest of their welcome.
elizabeth jumped out; and after giving each of them a hasty kiss, hurried into the vestibule, where jane, who came running downstairs from her mothers apartment, immediately met her.
elizabeth, as she affectionately embraced her, whilst tears filled the eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether anything had been heard of the fugitives.
not yet, replied jane.
but now that my dear uncle is come, i hope everything will be well.
is my father in town?
yes, he went on tuesday, as i wrote you word.
and have you heard from him often?
we have heard only once.
he wrote me a few lines on wednesday, to say that he had arrived in safety, and to give me his directions, which i particularly begged him to do.
he merely added, that he should not write again, till he had something of importance to mention.
and my motherhow is she?
how are you all?
my mother is tolerably well, i trust; though her spirits are greatly shaken.
she is upstairs, and will have great satisfaction in seeing you all.
she does not yet leave her dressingroom.
mary and kitty, thank heaven!
are quite well.
but youhow are you?
cried elizabeth.
you look pale.
how much you must have gone through!
her sister, however, assured her of her being perfectly well; and their conversation, which had been passing while mr. and mrs. gardiner were engaged with their children, was now put an end to by the approach of the whole party.
jane ran to her uncle and aunt, and welcomed and thanked them both, with alternate smiles and tears.
when they were all in the drawingroom, the questions which elizabeth had already asked were of course repeated by the others, and they soon found that jane had no intelligence to give.
the sanguine hope of good, however, which the benevolence of her heart suggested, had not yet deserted her; she still expected that it would all end well, and that every morning would bring some letter, either from lydia or her father, to explain their proceedings, and, perhaps, announce the marriage.
mrs. bennet, to whose apartment they all repaired, after a few minutes conversation together, received them exactly as might be expected; with tears and lamentations of regret, invectives against the villainous conduct of wickham, and complaints of her own sufferings and illusage; blaming everybody but the person to whose illjudging indulgence the errors of her daughter must be principally owing.
if i had been able, said she, to carry my point in going to brighton with all my family, this would not have happened: but poor dear lydia had nobody to take care of her.
why did the forsters ever let her go out of their sight?
i am sure there was some great neglect or other on their side, for she is not the kind of girl to do such a thing, if she had been well looked after.
i always thought they were very unfit to have the charge of her; but i was overruled, as i always am.
poor, dear child!
and now heres mr. bennet gone away, and i know he will fight wickham, wherever he meets him, and then he will be killed, and what is to become of us all?
the collinses will turn us out, before he is cold in his grave; and if you are not kind to us, brother, i do not know what we shall do.
they all exclaimed against such terrific ideas; and mr. gardiner, after general assurances of his affection for her and all her family, told her that he meant to be in london the very next day, and would assist mr. bennet in every endeavour for recovering lydia.
do not give way to useless alarm, added he: though it is right to be prepared for the worst, there is no occasion to look on it as certain.
it is not quite a week since they left brighton.
in a few days more, we may gain some news of them; and till we know that they are not married, and have no design of marrying, do not let us give the matter over as lost.
as soon as i get to town, i shall go to my brother, and make him come home with me to gracechurch street, and then we may consult together as to what is to be done.
oh, my dear brother, replied mrs. bennet, that is exactly what i could most wish for.
and now do, when you get to town, find them out, wherever they may be; and if they are not married already, make them marry.
and as for wedding clothes, do not let them wait for that, but tell lydia she shall have as much money as she chooses to buy them, after they are married.
and, above all things, keep mr. bennet from fighting.
tell him what a dreadful state i am inthat i am frightened out of my wits; and have such tremblings, such flutterings all over me, such spasms in my side, and pains in my head, and such beatings at my heart, that i can get no rest by night nor by day.
and tell my dear lydia not to give any directions about her clothes till she has seen me, for she does not know which are the best warehouses.
oh, brother, how kind you are!
i know you will contrive it all.
but mr. gardiner, though he assured her again of his earnest endeavours in the cause, could not avoid recommending moderation to her, as well in her hopes as her fears; and after talking with her in this manner till dinner was on table, they left her to vent all her feelings on the housekeeper, who attended in the absence of her daughters.
though her brother and sister were persuaded that there was no real occasion for such a seclusion from the family, they did not attempt to oppose it; for they knew that she had not prudence enough to hold her tongue before the servants, while they waited at table, and judged it better that one only of the household, and the one whom they could most trust, should comprehend all her fears and solicitude on the subject.
in the diningroom they were soon joined by mary and kitty, who had been too busily engaged in their separate apartments to make their appearance before.
one came from her books, and the other from her toilette.
the faces of both, however, were tolerably calm; and no change was visible in either, except that the loss of her favourite sister, or the anger which she had herself incurred in the business, had given something more of fretfulness than usual to the accents of kitty.
as for mary, she was mistress enough of herself to whisper to elizabeth, with a countenance of grave reflection, soon after they were seated at table, this is a most unfortunate affair, and will probably be much talked of.
but we must stem the tide of malice, and pour into the wounded bosoms of each other the balm of sisterly consolation.
then perceiving in elizabeth no inclination of replying, she added, unhappy as the event must be for lydia, we may draw from it this useful lesson:that loss of virtue in a female is irretrievable, that one false step involves her in endless ruin, that her reputation is no less brittle than it is beautiful, and that she cannot be too much guarded in her behaviour towards the undeserving of the other sex.
elizabeth lifted up her eyes in amazement, but was too much oppressed to make any reply.
mary, however, continued to console herself with such kind of moral extractions from the evil before them.
in the afternoon, the two elder miss bennets were able to be for half an hour by themselves; and elizabeth instantly availed herself of the opportunity of making any inquiries which jane was equally eager to satisfy.
after joining in general lamentations over the dreadful sequel of this event, which elizabeth considered as all but certain, and miss bennet could not assert to be wholly impossible, the former continued the subject by saying, but tell me all and everything about it which i have not already heard.
give me further particulars.
what did colonel forster say?
had they no apprehension of anything before the elopement took place?
they must have seen them together for ever.
colonel forster did own that he had often suspected some partiality, especially on lydias side, but nothing to give him any alarm.
i am so grieved for him.
his behaviour was attentive and kind to the utmost.
he was coming to us, in order to assure us of his concern, before he had any idea of their not being gone to scotland: when that apprehension first got abroad, it hastened his journey.
and was denny convinced that wickham would not marry?
did he know of their intending to go off?
had colonel forster seen denny himself?
yes; but when questioned by him, denny denied knowing anything of their plan, and would not give his real opinion about it.
he did not repeat his persuasion of their not marrying, and from that i am inclined to hope he might have been misunderstood before.
and till colonel forster came himself, not one of you entertained a doubt, i suppose, of their being really married?
how was it possible that such an idea should enter our brains?
i felt a little uneasya little fearful of my sisters happiness with him in marriage, because i knew that his conduct had not been always quite right.
my father and mother knew nothing of that; they only felt how imprudent a match it must be.
kitty then owned, with a very natural triumph on knowing more than the rest of us, that in lydias last letter she had prepared her for such a step.
she had known, it seems, of their being in love with each other many weeks.
but not before they went to brighton?
no, i believe not.
and did colonel forster appear to think ill of wickham himself?
does he know his real character?
i must confess that he did not speak so well of wickham as he formerly did.
he believed him to be imprudent and extravagant; and since this sad affair has taken place, it is said that he left meryton greatly in debt: but i hope this may be false.
oh, jane, had we been less secret, had we told what we knew of him, this could not have happened!
perhaps it would have been better, replied her sister.
but to expose the former faults of any person, without knowing what their present feelings were, seemed unjustifiable.
we acted with the best intentions.
could colonel forster repeat the particulars of lydias note to his wife?
he brought it with him for us to see.
jane then took it from her pocketbook, and gave it to elizabeth.
these were the contents:  nind my dear harriet,  you will laugh when you know where i am gone, and i cannot help laughing myself at your surprise tomorrow morning, as soon as i am missed.
i am going to gretna green, and if you cannot guess with who, i shall think you a simpleton, for there is but one man in the world i love, and he is an angel.
i should never be happy without him, so think it no harm to be off.
you need not send them word at longbourn of my going, if you do not like it, for it will make the surprise the greater when i write to them, and sign my name lydia wickham.
what a good joke it will be!
i can hardly write for laughing.
pray make my excuses to pratt for not keeping my engagement, and dancing with him tonight.
tell him i hope he will excuse me when he knows all, and tell him i will dance with him at the next ball we meet with great pleasure.
i shall send for my clothes when i get to longbourn; but i wish you would tell sally to mend a great slit in my worked muslin gown before they are packed up.
goodbye.
give my love to colonel forster.
i hope you will drink to our good journey.
your affectionate friend, lydia bennet.
oh, thoughtless, thoughtless lydia!
cried elizabeth when she had finished it.
what a letter is this, to be written at such a moment!
but at least it shows that she was serious in the object of her journey.
whatever he might afterwards persuade her to, it was not on her side a scheme of infamy.
my poor father!
how he must have felt it!
i never saw anyone so shocked.
he could not speak a word for full ten minutes.
my mother was taken ill immediately, and the whole house in such confusion!
oh, jane, cried elizabeth, was there a servant belonging to it who did not know the whole story before the end of the day?
i do not know: i hope there was.
but to be guarded at such a time is very difficult.
my mother was in hysterics; and though i endeavoured to give her every assistance in my power, i am afraid i did not do so much as i might have done.
but the horror of what might possibly happen almost took from me my faculties.
your attendance upon her has been too much for you.
you do not look well.
oh that i had been with you!
you have had every care and anxiety upon yourself alone.
mary and kitty have been very kind, and would have shared in every fatigue, i am sure, but i did not think it right for either of them.
kitty is slight and delicate, and mary studies so much that her hours of repose should not be broken in on.
my aunt philips came to longbourn on tuesday, after my father went away; and was so good as to stay till thursday with me.
she was of great use and comfort to us all, and lady lucas has been very kind: she walked here on wednesday morning to condole with us, and offered her services, or any of her daughters, if they could be of use to us.
she had better have stayed at home, cried elizabeth: perhaps she meant well, but, under such a misfortune as this, one cannot see too little of ones neighbours.
assistance is impossible; condolence, insufferable.
let them triumph over us at a distance, and be satisfied.
she then proceeded to inquire into the measures which her father had intended to pursue, while in town, for the recovery of his daughter.
he meant, i believe, replied jane, to go to epsom, the place where they last changed horses, see the postilions, and try if anything could be made out from them.
his principal object must be to discover the number of the hackney coach which took them from clapham.
it had come with a fare from london; and as he thought the circumstance of a gentleman and ladys removing from one carriage into another might be remarked, he meant to make inquiries at clapham.
if he could anyhow discover at what house the coachman had before set down his fare, he determined to make inquiries there, and hoped it might not be impossible to find out the stand and number of the coach.
i do not know of any other designs that he had formed; but he was in such a hurry to be gone, and his spirits so greatly discomposed, that i had difficulty in finding out even so much as this.
illustration: the post  chapter xlviii.
illustration the whole party were in hopes of a letter from mr. bennet the next morning, but the post came in without bringing a single line from him.
his family knew him to be, on all common occasions, a most negligent and dilatory correspondent; but at such a time they had hoped for exertion.
they were forced to conclude, that he had no pleasing intelligence to send; but even of that they would have been glad to be certain.
mr. gardiner had waited only for the letters before he set off.
when he was gone, they were certain at least of receiving constant information of what was going on; and their uncle promised, at parting, to prevail on mr. bennet to return to longbourn as soon as he could, to the great consolation of his sister, who considered it as the only security for her husbands not being killed in a duel.
mrs. gardiner and the children were to remain in hertfordshire a few days longer, as the former thought her presence might be serviceable to her nieces.
she shared in their attendance on mrs. bennet, and was a great comfort to them in their hours of freedom.
their other aunt also visited them frequently, and always, as she said, with the design of cheering and heartening them upthough, as she never came without reporting some fresh instance of wickhams extravagance or irregularity, she seldom went away without leaving them more dispirited than she found them.
all meryton seemed striving to blacken the man who, but three months before, had been almost an angel of light.
he was declared to be in debt to every tradesman in the place, and his intrigues, all honoured with the title of seduction, had been extended into every tradesmans family.
everybody declared that he was the wickedest young man in the world; and everybody began to find out that they had always distrusted the appearance of his goodness.
elizabeth, though she did not credit above half of what was said, believed enough to make her former assurance of her sisters ruin still more certain; and even jane, who believed still less of it, became almost hopeless, more especially as the time was now come, when, if they had gone to scotland, which she had never before entirely despaired of, they must in all probability have gained some news of them.
mr. gardiner left longbourn on sunday; on tuesday, his wife received a letter from him: it told them, that on his arrival he had immediately found out his brother, and persuaded him to come to gracechurch street.
that mr. bennet had been to epsom and clapham, before his arrival, but without gaining any satisfactory information; and that he was now determined to inquire at all the principal hotels in town, as mr. bennet thought it possible they might have gone to one of them, on their first coming to london, before they procured lodgings.
mr. gardiner himself did not expect any success from this measure; but as his brother was eager in it, he meant to assist him in pursuing it.
he added, that mr. bennet seemed wholly disinclined at present to leave london, and promised to write again very soon.
there was also a postscript to this effect: i have written to colonel forster to desire him to find out, if possible, from some of the young mans intimates in the regiment, whether wickham has any relations or connections who would be likely to know in what part of the town he has now concealed himself.
if there were anyone that one could apply to, with a probability of gaining such a clue as that, it might be of essential consequence.
at present we have nothing to guide us.
colonel forster will, i dare say, do everything in his power to satisfy us on this head.
but, on second thoughts, perhaps lizzy could tell us what relations he has now living better than any other person.
elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference for her authority proceeded; but it was not in her power to give any information of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserved.
she had never heard of his having had any relations, except a father and mother, both of whom had been dead many years.
it was possible, however, that some of his companions in the shire might be able to give more information; and though she was not very sanguine in expecting it, the application was a something to look forward to.
every day at longbourn was now a day of anxiety; but the most anxious part of each was when the post was expected.
the arrival of letters was the first grand object of every mornings impatience.
through letters, whatever of good or bad was to be told would be communicated; and every succeeding day was expected to bring some news of importance.
but before they heard again from mr. gardiner, a letter arrived for their father, from a different quarter, from mr. collins; which, as jane had received directions to open all that came for him in his absence, she accordingly read; and elizabeth, who knew what curiosities his letters always were, looked over her, and read it likewise.
it was as follows:  my dear sir,  i feel myself called upon, by our relationship, and my situation in life, to condole with you on the grievous affliction you are now suffering under, of which we were yesterday informed by a letter from hertfordshire.
be assured, my dear sir, that mrs. collins and myself sincerely sympathize with you, and all your respectable family, in your present distress, which must be of the bitterest kind, because proceeding from a cause which no time can remove.
no arguments shall be wanting on my part, that can alleviate so severe a misfortune; or that may comfort you, under a circumstance that must be, of all others, most afflicting to a parents mind.
the death of your daughter would have been a blessing in comparison of this.
and it is the more to be lamented, because there is reason to suppose, as my dear charlotte informs me, that this licentiousness of behaviour in your illustration: to whom i have related the affair copyright 1894 by george allen.
daughter has proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence; though, at the same time, for the consolation of yourself and mrs. bennet, i am inclined to think that her own disposition must be naturally bad, or she could not be guilty of such an enormity, at so early an age.
howsoever that may be, you are grievously to be pitied; in which opinion i am not only joined by mrs. collins, but likewise by lady catherine and her daughter, to whom i have related the affair.
they agree with me in apprehending that this false step in one daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of all the others: for who, as lady catherine herself condescendingly says, will connect themselves with such a family?
and this consideration leads me, moreover, to reflect, with augmented satisfaction, on a certain event of last november; for had it been otherwise, i must have been involved in all your sorrow and disgrace.
let me advise you, then, my dear sir, to console yourself as much as possible, to throw off your unworthy child from your affection for ever, and leave her to reap the fruits of her own heinous offence.
i am, dear sir, etc., etc.
mr. gardiner did not write again, till he had received an answer from colonel forster; and then he had nothing of a pleasant nature to send.
it was not known that wickham had a single relation with whom he kept up any connection, and it was certain that he had no near one living.
his former acquaintance had been numerous; but since he had been in the militia, it did not appear that he was on terms of particular friendship with any of them.
there was no one, therefore, who could be pointed out as likely to give any news of him.
and in the wretched state of his own finances, there was a very powerful motive for secrecy, in addition to his fear of discovery by lydias relations; for it had just transpired that he had left gaming debts behind him to a very considerable amount.
colonel forster believed that more than a thousand pounds would be necessary to clear his expenses at brighton.
he owed a good deal in the town, but his debts of honour were still more formidable.
mr. gardiner did not attempt to conceal these particulars from the longbourn family; jane heard them with horror.
a gamester!
she cried.
this is wholly unexpected; i had not an idea of it.
mr. gardiner added, in his letter, that they might expect to see their father at home on the following day, which was saturday.
rendered spiritless by the ill success of all their endeavours, he had yielded to his brotherinlaws entreaty that he would return to his family and leave it to him to do whatever occasion might suggest to be advisable for continuing their pursuit.
when mrs. bennet was told of this, she did not express so much satisfaction as her children expected, considering what her anxiety for his life had been before.
what!
is he coming home, and without poor lydia?
she cried.
sure he will not leave london before he has found them.
who is to fight wickham, and make him marry her, if he comes away?
as mrs. gardiner began to wish to be at home, it was settled that she and her children should go to london at the same time that mr. bennet came from it.
the coach, therefore, took them the first stage of their journey, and brought its master back to longbourn.
mrs. gardiner went away in all the perplexity about elizabeth and her derbyshire friend, that had attended her from that part of the world.
his name had never been voluntarily mentioned before them by her niece; and the kind of halfexpectation which mrs. gardiner had formed, of their being followed by a letter from him, had ended in nothing.
elizabeth had received none since her return, that could come from pemberley.
the present unhappy state of the family rendered any other excuse for the lowness of her spirits unnecessary; nothing, therefore, could be fairly conjectured from that,though elizabeth, who was by this time tolerably well acquainted with her own feelings, was perfectly aware that, had she known nothing of darcy, she could have borne the dread of lydias infamy somewhat better.
it would have spared her, she thought, one sleepless night out of two.
when mr. bennet arrived, he had all the appearance of his usual philosophic composure.
he said as little as he had ever been in the habit of saying; made no mention of the business that had taken him away; and it was some time before his daughters had courage to speak of it.
it was not till the afternoon, when he joined them at tea, that elizabeth ventured to introduce the subject; and then, on her briefly expressing her sorrow for what he must have endured, he replied, say nothing of that.
who should suffer but myself?
it has been my own doing, and i ought to feel it.
you must not be too severe upon yourself, replied elizabeth.
you may well warn me against such an evil.
human nature is so prone to fall into it!
no, lizzy, let me once in my life feel how much i have been to blame.
i am not afraid of being overpowered by the impression.
it will pass away soon enough.
do you suppose them to be in london?
yes; where else can they be so well concealed?
and lydia used to want to go to london, added kitty.
she is happy, then, said her father, drily; and her residence there will probably be of some duration.
then, after a short silence, he continued, lizzy, i bear you no illwill for being justified in your advice to me last may, which, considering the event, shows some greatness of mind.
they were interrupted by miss bennet, who came to fetch her mothers tea.
this is a parade, cried he, which does one good; it gives such an elegance to misfortune!
another day i will do the same; i will sit in my library, in my nightcap and powdering gown, and give as much trouble as i can,or perhaps i may defer it till kitty runs away.
i am not going to run away, papa, said kitty, fretfully.
if i should ever go to brighton, i would behave better than lydia.
you go to brighton!
i would not trust you so near it as eastbourne, for fifty pounds!
no, kitty, i have at least learnt to be cautious, and you will feel the effects of it.
no officer is ever to enter my house again, nor even to pass through the village.
balls will be absolutely prohibited, unless you stand up with one of your sisters.
and you are never to stir out of doors, till you can prove that you have spent ten minutes of every day in a rational manner.
kitty, who took all these threats in a serious light, began to cry.
well, well, said he, do not make yourself unhappy.
if you are a good girl for the next ten years, i will take you to a review at the end of them.
illustration chapter xlix.
illustration two days after mr. bennets return, as jane and elizabeth were walking together in the shrubbery behind the house, they saw the housekeeper coming towards them, and concluding that she came to call them to their mother, went forward to meet her; but instead of the expected summons, when they approached her, she said to miss bennet, i beg your pardon, madam, for interrupting you, but i was in hopes you might have got some good news from town, so i took the liberty of coming to ask.
what do you mean, hill?
we have heard nothing from town.
dear madam, cried mrs. hill, in great astonishment, dont you know there is an express come for master from mr. gardiner?
he has been here this half hour, and master has had a letter.
away ran the girls, too eager to get in to have time for speech.
they ran through the vestibule into the breakfastroom; from thence to the library;their father was in neither; and they were on the point of seeking him upstairs with their mother, when they were met by the butler, who said, if you are looking for my master, maam, he is walking towards the little copse.
upon this information, they instantly passed through the hall once more, and ran across the lawn after their father, who was deliberately pursuing his way towards a small wood on one side of the paddock.
jane, who was not so light, nor so much in the habit of running as elizabeth, soon lagged behind, while her sister, panting for breath, came up with him, and eagerly cried out, oh, papa, what news?
what news?
have you heard from my uncle?
yes, i have had a letter from him by express.
well, and what news does it bringgood or bad?
what is there of good to be expected?
said he, taking the letter from his pocket; but perhaps you would like to read it.
elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand.
jane now came up.
read it aloud, said their father, for i hardly know myself what it is about.
right gracechurch street, monday, august 2.  my dear brother, at last i am able to send you some tidings of my niece, and such as, upon the whole, i hope will give you satisfaction.
soon after you left me on saturday, i was fortunate enough to find out in what part of london they were.
the particulars i reserve till we meet.
it is enough to know they are discovered: i have seen them both illustration: but perhaps you would like to read it copyright 1894 by george allen.
then it is as i always hoped, cried jane: they are married!
elizabeth read on: i have seen them both.
they are not married, nor can i find there was any intention of being so; but if you are willing to perform the engagements which i have ventured to make on your side, i hope it will not be long before they are.
all that is required of you is, to assure to your daughter, by settlement, her equal share of the five thousand pounds, secured among your children after the decease of yourself and my sister; and, moreover, to enter into an engagement of allowing her, during your life, one hundred pounds per annum.
these are conditions which, considering everything, i had no hesitation in complying with, as far as i thought myself privileged, for you.
i shall send this by express, that no time may be lost in bringing me your answer.
you will easily comprehend, from these particulars, that mr. wickhams circumstances are not so hopeless as they are generally believed to be.
the world has been deceived in that respect; and i am happy to say, there will be some little money, even when all his debts are discharged, to settle on my niece, in addition to her own fortune.
if, as i conclude will be the case, you send me full powers to act in your name throughout the whole of this business, i will immediately give directions to haggerston for preparing a proper settlement.
there will not be the smallest occasion for your coming to town again; therefore stay quietly at longbourn, and depend on my diligence and care.
send back your answer as soon as you can, and be careful to write explicitly.
we have judged it best that my niece should be married from this house, of which i hope you will approve.
she comes to us today.
i shall write again as soon as anything more is determined on.
yours, etc.
edw.
gardiner.
is it possible?
cried elizabeth, when she had finished.
can it be possible that he will marry her?
wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we have thought him, said her sister.
my dear father, i congratulate you.
and have you answered the letter?
said elizabeth.
no; but it must be done soon.
most earnestly did she then entreat him to lose no more time before he wrote.
oh!
my dear father, she cried, come back and write immediately.
consider how important every moment is in such a case.
let me write for you, said jane, if you dislike the trouble yourself.
i dislike it very much, he replied; but it must be done.
and so saying, he turned back with them, and walked towards the house.
andmay i ask?
said elizabeth; but the terms, i suppose, must be complied with.
complied with!
i am only ashamed of his asking so little.
and they must marry!
yet he is such a man.
yes, yes, they must marry.
there is nothing else to be done.
but there are two things that i want very much to know:one is, how much money your uncle has laid down to bring it about; and the other, how i am ever to pay him.
money!
my uncle!
cried jane, what do you mean, sir?
i mean that no man in his proper senses would marry lydia on so slight a temptation as one hundred a year during my life, and fifty after i am gone.
that is very true, said elizabeth; though it had not occurred to me before.
his debts to be discharged, and something still to remain!
oh, it must be my uncles doings!
generous, good man, i am afraid he has distressed himself.
a small sum could not do all this.
no, said her father.
wickhams a fool if he takes her with a farthing less than ten thousand pounds: i should be sorry to think so ill of him, in the very beginning of our relationship.
ten thousand pounds!
heaven forbid!
how is half such a sum to be repaid?
mr. bennet made no answer; and each of them, deep in thought, continued silent till they reached the house.
their father then went to the library to write, and the girls walked into the breakfastroom.
and they are really to be married!
cried elizabeth, as soon as they were by themselves.
how strange this is!
and for this we are to be thankful.
that they should marry, small as is their chance of happiness, and wretched as is his character, we are forced to rejoice!
oh, lydia!
i comfort myself with thinking, replied jane, that he certainly would not marry lydia, if he had not a real regard for her.
though our kind uncle has done something towards clearing him, i cannot believe that ten thousand pounds, or anything like it, has been advanced.
he has children of his own, and may have more.
how could he spare half ten thousand pounds?
if we are ever able to learn what wickhams debts have been, said elizabeth, and how much is settled on his side on our sister, we shall exactly know what mr. gardiner has done for them, because wickham has not sixpence of his own.
the kindness of my uncle and aunt can never be requited.
their taking her home, and affording her their personal protection and countenance, is such a sacrifice to her advantage as years of gratitude cannot enough acknowledge.
by this time she is actually with them!
if such goodness does not make her miserable now, she will never deserve to be happy!
what a meeting for her, when she first sees my aunt!
we must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side, said jane: i hope and trust they will yet be happy.
his consenting to marry her is a proof, i will believe, that he is come to a right way of thinking.
their mutual affection will steady them; and i flatter myself they will settle so quietly, and live in so rational a manner, as may in time make their past imprudence forgotten.
their conduct has been such, replied elizabeth, as neither you, nor i, nor anybody, can ever forget.
it is useless to talk of it.
it now occurred to the girls that their mother was in all likelihood perfectly ignorant of what had happened.
they went to the library, therefore, and asked their father whether he would not wish them to make it known to her.
he was writing, and, without raising his head, coolly replied, just as you please.
may we take my uncles letter to read to her?
take whatever you like, and get away.
elizabeth took the letter from his writingtable, and they went upstairs together.
mary and kitty were both with mrs. bennet: one communication would, therefore, do for all.
after a slight preparation for good news, the letter was read aloud.
mrs. bennet could hardly contain herself.
as soon as jane had read mr. gardiners hope of lydias being soon married, her joy burst forth, and every following sentence added to its exuberance.
she was now in an irritation as violent from delight as she had ever been fidgety from alarm and vexation.
to know that her daughter would be married was enough.
she was disturbed by no fear for her felicity, nor humbled by any remembrance of her misconduct.
my dear, dear lydia!
she cried: this is delightful indeed!
she will be married!
i shall see her again!
she will be married at sixteen!
my good, kind brother!
i knew how it would bei knew he would manage everything.
how i long to see her!
and to see dear wickham too!
but the clothes, the wedding clothes!
i will write to my sister gardiner about them directly.
lizzy, my dear, run down to your father, and ask him how much he will give her.
stay, stay, i will go myself.
ring the bell, kitty, for hill.
i will put on my things in a moment.
my dear, dear lydia!
how merry we shall be together when we meet!
her eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief to the violence of these transports, by leading her thoughts to the obligations which mr. gardiners behaviour laid them all under.
for we must attribute this happy conclusion, she added, in a great measure to his kindness.
we are persuaded that he has pledged himself to assist mr. wickham with money.
well, cried her mother, it is all very right; who should do it but her own uncle?
if he had not had a family of his own, i and my children must have had all his money, you know; and it is the first time we have ever had anything from him except a few presents.
well!
i am so happy.
in a short time, i shall have a daughter married.
mrs. wickham!
how well it sounds!
and she was only sixteen last june.
my dear jane, i am in such a flutter, that i am sure i cant write; so i will dictate, and you write for me.
we will settle with your father about the money afterwards; but the things should be ordered immediately.
she was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico, muslin, and cambric, and would shortly have dictated some very plentiful orders, had not jane, though with some difficulty, persuaded her to wait till her father was at leisure to be consulted.
one days delay, she observed, would be of small importance; and her mother was too happy to be quite so obstinate as usual.
other schemes, too, came into her head.
i will go to meryton, said she, as soon as i am dressed, and tell the good, good news to my sister philips.
and as i come back, i can call on lady lucas and mrs. long.
kitty, run down and order the carriage.
an airing would do me a great deal of good, i am sure.
girls, can i do anything for you in meryton?
oh!
here comes hill.
my dear hill, have you heard the good news?
miss lydia is going to be married; and you shall all have a bowl of punch to make merry at her wedding.
mrs. hill began instantly to express her joy.
elizabeth received her congratulations amongst the rest, and then, sick of this folly, took refuge in her own room, that she might think with freedom.
poor lydias situation must, at best, be bad enough; but that it was no worse, she had need to be thankful.
she felt it so; and though, in looking forward, neither rational happiness, nor worldly prosperity could be justly expected for her sister, in looking back to what they had feared, only two hours ago, she felt all the advantages of what they had gained.
illustration: the spiteful old ladies copyright 1894 by george allen.
chapter l. illustration mr. bennet had very often wished, before this period of his life, that, instead of spending his whole income, he had laid by an annual sum, for the better provision of his children, and of his wife, if she survived him.
he now wished it more than ever.
had he done his duty in that respect, lydia need not have been indebted to her uncle for whatever of honour or credit could now be purchased for her.
the satisfaction of prevailing on one of the most worthless young men in great britain to be her husband might then have rested in its proper place.
he was seriously concerned that a cause of so little advantage to anyone should be forwarded at the sole expense of his brotherinlaw; and he was determined, if possible, to find out the extent of his assistance, and to discharge the obligation as soon as he could.
when first mr. bennet had married, economy was held to be perfectly useless; for, of course, they were to have a son.
this son was to join in cutting off the entail, as soon as he should be of age, and the widow and younger children would by that means be provided for.
five daughters successively entered the world, but yet the son was to come; and mrs. bennet, for many years after lydias birth, had been certain that he would.
this event had at last been despaired of, but it was then too late to be saving.
mrs. bennet had no turn for economy; and her husbands love of independence had alone prevented their exceeding their income.
five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on mrs. bennet and the children.
but in what proportions it should be divided amongst the latter depended on the will of the parents.
this was one point, with regard to lydia at least, which was now to be settled, and mr. bennet could have no hesitation in acceding to the proposal before him.
in terms of grateful acknowledgment for the kindness of his brother, though expressed most concisely, he then delivered on paper his perfect approbation of all that was done, and his willingness to fulfil the engagements that had been made for him.
he had never before supposed that, could wickham be prevailed on to marry his daughter, it would be done with so little inconvenience to himself as by the present arrangement.
he would scarcely be ten pounds a year the loser, by the hundred that was to be paid them; for, what with her board and pocket allowance, and the continual presents in money which passed to her through her mothers hands, lydias expenses had been very little within that sum.
that it would be done with such trifling exertion on his side, too, was another very welcome surprise; for his chief wish at present was to have as little trouble in the business as possible.
when the first transports of rage which had produced his activity in seeking her were over, he naturally returned to all his former indolence.
his letter was soon despatched; for though dilatory in undertaking business, he was quick in its execution.
he begged to know further particulars of what he was indebted to his brother; but was too angry with lydia to send any message to her.
the good news quickly spread through the house; and with proportionate speed through the neighbourhood.
it was borne in the latter with decent philosophy.
to be sure, it would have been more for the advantage of conversation, had miss lydia bennet come upon the town; or, as the happiest alternative, been secluded from the world in some distant farmhouse.
but there was much to be talked of, in marrying her; and the goodnatured wishes for her welldoing, which had proceeded before from all the spiteful old ladies in meryton, lost but little of their spirit in this change of circumstances, because with such a husband her misery was considered certain.
it was a fortnight since mrs. bennet had been down stairs, but on this happy day she again took her seat at the head of her table, and in spirits oppressively high.
no sentiment of shame gave a damp to her triumph.
the marriage of a daughter, which had been the first object of her wishes since jane was sixteen, was now on the point of accomplishment, and her thoughts and her words ran wholly on those attendants of elegant nuptials, fine muslins, new carriages, and servants.
she was busily searching through the neighbourhood for a proper situation for her daughter; and, without knowing or considering what their income might be, rejected many as deficient in size and importance.
haye park might do, said she, if the gouldings would quit it, or the great house at stoke, if the drawingroom were larger; but ashworth is too far off.
i could not bear to have her ten miles from me; and as for purvis lodge, the attics are dreadful.
her husband allowed her to talk on without interruption while the servants remained.
but when they had withdrawn, he said to her, mrs. bennet, before you take any, or all of these houses, for your son and daughter, let us come to a right understanding.
into one house in this neighbourhood they shall never have admittance.
i will not encourage the imprudence of either, by receiving them at longbourn.
a long dispute followed this declaration; but mr. bennet was firm: it soon led to another; and mrs. bennet found, with amazement and horror, that her husband would not advance a guinea to buy clothes for his daughter.
he protested that she should receive from him no mark of affection whatever on the occasion.
mrs. bennet could hardly comprehend it.
that his anger could be carried to such a point of inconceivable resentment as to refuse his daughter a privilege, without which her marriage would scarcely seem valid, exceeded all that she could believe possible.
she was more alive to the disgrace, which her want of new clothes must reflect on her daughters nuptials, than to any sense of shame at her eloping and living with wickham a fortnight before they took place.
elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she had, from the distress of the moment, been led to make mr. darcy acquainted with their fears for her sister; for since her marriage would so shortly give the proper termination to the elopement, they might hope to conceal its unfavourable beginning from all those who were not immediately on the spot.
she had no fear of its spreading farther, through his means.
there were few people on whose secrecy she would have more confidently depended; but at the same time there was no one whose knowledge of a sisters frailty would have mortified her so much.
not, however, from any fear of disadvantage from it individually to herself; for at any rate there seemed a gulf impassable between them.
had lydias marriage been concluded on the most honourable terms, it was not to be supposed that mr. darcy would connect himself with a family, where to every other objection would now be added an alliance and relationship of the nearest kind with the man whom he so justly scorned.
from such a connection she could not wonder that he should shrink.
the wish of procuring her regard, which she had assured herself of his feeling in derbyshire, could not in rational expectation survive such a blow as this.
she was humbled, she was grieved; she repented, though she hardly knew of what.
she became jealous of his esteem, when she could no longer hope to be benefited by it.
she wanted to hear of him, when there seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence.
she was convinced that she could have been happy with him, when it was no longer likely they should meet.
what a triumph for him, as she often thought, could he know that the proposals which she had proudly spurned only four months ago would now have been gladly and gratefully received!
he was as generous, she doubted not, as the most generous of his sex.
but while he was mortal, there must be a triumph.
she began now to comprehend that he was exactly the man who, in disposition and talents, would most suit her.
his understanding and temper, though unlike her own, would have answered all her wishes.
it was an union that must have been to the advantage of both: by her ease and liveliness, his mind might have been softened, his manners improved; and from his judgment, information, and knowledge of the world, she must have received benefit of greater importance.
but no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring multitude what connubial felicity really was.
an union of a different tendency, and precluding the possibility of the other, was soon to be formed in their family.
how wickham and lydia were to be supported in tolerable independence she could not imagine.
but how little of permanent happiness could belong to a couple who were only brought together because their passions were stronger than their virtue, she could easily conjecture.
mr. gardiner soon wrote again to his brother.
to mr. bennets acknowledgments he briefly replied, with assurances of his eagerness to promote the welfare of any of his family; and concluded with entreaties that the subject might never be mentioned to him again.
the principal purport of his letter was to inform them, that mr. wickham had resolved on quitting the militia.
it was greatly my wish that he should do so, he added, as soon as his marriage was fixed on.
and i think you will agree with me, in considering a removal from that corps as highly advisable, both on his account and my nieces.
it is mr. wickhams intention to go into the regulars; and, among his former friends, there are still some who are able and willing to assist him in the army.
he has the promise of an ensigncy in generals regiment, now quartered in the north.
it is an advantage to have it so far from this part of the kingdom.
he promises fairly; and i hope among different people, where they may each have a character to preserve, they will both be more prudent.
i have written to colonel forster, to inform him of our present arrangements, and to request that he will satisfy the various creditors of mr. wickham in and near brighton with assurances of speedy payment, for which i have pledged myself.
and will you give yourself the trouble of carrying similar assurances to his creditors in meryton, of whom i shall subjoin a list, according to his information?
he has given in all his debts; i hope at least he has not deceived us.
haggerston has our directions, and all will be completed in a week.
they will then join his regiment, unless they are first invited to longbourn; and i understand from mrs. gardiner that my niece is very desirous of seeing you all before she leaves the south.
she is well, and begs to be dutifully remembered to you and her mother.yours, etc.
e. gardiner.
mr. bennet and his daughters saw all the advantages of wickhams removal from the shire, as clearly as mr. gardiner could do.
but mrs. bennet was not so well pleased with it.
lydias being settled in the north, just when she had expected most pleasure and pride in her company, for she had by no means given up her plan of their residing in hertfordshire, was a severe disappointment; and, besides, it was such a pity that lydia should be taken from a regiment where she was acquainted with everybody, and had so many favourites.
she is so fond of mrs. forster, said she, it will be quite shocking to send her away!
and there are several of the young men, too, that she likes very much.
the officers may not be so pleasant in generals regiment.
his daughters request, for such it might be considered, of being admitted into her family again, before she set off for the north, received at first an absolute negative.
but jane and elizabeth, who agreed in wishing, for the sake of their sisters feelings and consequence, that she should be noticed on her marriage by her parents, urged him so earnestly, yet so rationally and so mildly, to receive her and her husband at longbourn, as soon as they were married, that he was prevailed on to think as they thought, and act as they wished.
and their mother had the satisfaction of knowing, that she should be able to show her married daughter in the neighbourhood, before she was banished to the north.
when mr. bennet wrote again to his brother, therefore, he sent his permission for them to come; and it was settled, that, as soon as the ceremony was over, they should proceed to longbourn.
elizabeth was surprised, however, that wickham should consent to such a scheme; and, had she consulted only her own inclination, any meeting with him would have been the last object of her wishes.
illustration: with an affectionate smile copyright 1894 by george allen.
chapter li.
illustration their sisters weddingday arrived; and jane and elizabeth felt for her probably more than she felt for herself.
the carriage was sent to meet them at, and they were to return in it by dinnertime.
their arrival was dreaded by the elder miss bennetsand jane more especially, who gave lydia the feelings which would have attended herself, had she been the culprit, and was wretched in the thought of what her sister must endure.
they came.
the family were assembled in the breakfastroom to receive them.
smiles decked the face of mrs. bennet, as the carriage drove up to the door; her husband looked impenetrably grave; her daughters, alarmed, anxious, uneasy.
lydias voice was heard in the vestibule; the door was thrown open, and she ran into the room.
her mother stepped forwards, embraced her, and welcomed her with rapture; gave her hand with an affectionate smile to wickham, who followed his lady; and wished them both joy, with an alacrity which showed no doubt of their happiness.
their reception from mr. bennet, to whom they then turned, was not quite so cordial.
his countenance rather gained in austerity; and he scarcely opened his lips.
the easy assurance of the young couple, indeed, was enough to provoke him.
elizabeth was disgusted, and even miss bennet was shocked.
lydia was lydia still; untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy, and fearless.
she turned from sister to sister, demanding their congratulations; and when at length they all sat down, looked eagerly round the room, took notice of some little alteration in it, and observed, with a laugh, that it was a great while since she had been there.
wickham was not at all more distressed than herself; but his manners were always so pleasing, that, had his character and his marriage been exactly what they ought, his smiles and his easy address, while he claimed their relationship, would have delighted them all.
elizabeth had not before believed him quite equal to such assurance; but she sat down, resolving within herself to draw no limits in future to the impudence of an impudent man.
she blushed, and jane blushed; but the cheeks of the two who caused their confusion suffered no variation of colour.
there was no want of discourse.
the bride and her mother could neither of them talk fast enough; and wickham, who happened to sit near elizabeth, began inquiring after his acquaintance in that neighbourhood, with a goodhumoured ease, which she felt very unable to equal in her replies.
they seemed each of them to have the happiest memories in the world.
nothing of the past was recollected with pain; and lydia led voluntarily to subjects which her sisters would not have alluded to for the world.
only think of its being three months, she cried, since i went away: it seems but a fortnight, i declare; and yet there have been things enough happened in the time.
good gracious!
when i went away, i am sure i had no more idea of being married till i came back again!
though i thought it would be very good fun if i was.
her father lifted up his eyes, jane was distressed, elizabeth looked expressively at lydia; but she, who never heard nor saw anything of which she chose to be insensible, gaily continued, oh, mamma, do the people hereabouts know i am married today?
i was afraid they might not; and we overtook william goulding in his curricle, so i was determined he should know it, and so i let down the side glass next to him, and took off my glove and let my hand just rest upon the window frame, so that he might see the ring, and then i bowed and smiled like anything.
elizabeth could bear it no longer.
she got up and ran out of the room; and returned no more, till she heard them passing through the hall to the diningparlour.
she then joined them soon enough to see lydia, with anxious parade, walk up to her mothers right hand, and hear her say to her eldest sister, ah, jane, i take your place now, and you must go lower, because i am a married woman.
it was not to be supposed that time would give lydia that embarrassment from which she had been so wholly free at first.
her ease and good spirits increased.
she longed to see mrs. philips, the lucases, and all their other neighbours, and to hear herself called mrs. wickham by each of them; and in the meantime she went after dinner to show her ring and boast of being married to mrs. hill and the two housemaids.
well, mamma, said she, when they were all returned to the breakfastroom, and what do you think of my husband?
is not he a charming man?
i am sure my sisters must all envy me.
i only hope they may have half my good luck.
they must all go to brighton.
that is the place to get husbands.
what a pity it is, mamma, we did not all go!
very true; and if i had my will we should.
but, my dear lydia, i dont at all like your going such a way off.
must it be so?
oh, lord!
yes; there is nothing in that.
i shall like it of all things.
you and papa, and my sisters, must come down and see us.
we shall be at newcastle all the winter, and i dare say there will be some balls, and i will take care to get good partners for them all.
i should like it beyond anything!
said her mother.
and then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my sisters behind you; and i dare say i shall get husbands for them before the winter is over.
i thank you for my share of the favour, said elizabeth; but i do not particularly like your way of getting husbands.
their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them.
mr. wickham had received his commission before he left london, and he was to join his regiment at the end of a fortnight.
no one but mrs. bennet regretted that their stay would be so short; and she made the most of the time by visiting about with her daughter, and having very frequent parties at home.
these parties were acceptable to all; to avoid a family circle was even more desirable to such as did think than such as did not.
wickhams affection for lydia was just what elizabeth had expected to find it; not equal to lydias for him.
she had scarcely needed her present observation to be satisfied, from the reason of things, that their elopement had been brought on by the strength of her love rather than by his; and she would have wondered why, without violently caring for her, he chose to elope with her at all, had she not felt certain that his flight was rendered necessary by distress of circumstances; and if that were the case, he was not the young man to resist an opportunity of having a companion.
lydia was exceedingly fond of him.
he was her dear wickham on every occasion; no one was to be put in competition with him.
he did everything best in the world; and she was sure he would kill more birds on the first of september than anybody else in the country.
one morning, soon after their arrival, as she was sitting with her two elder sisters, she said to elizabeth, lizzy, i never gave you an account of my wedding, i believe.
you were not by, when i told mamma, and the others, all about it.
are not you curious to hear how it was managed?
no, really, replied elizabeth; i think there cannot be too little said on the subject.
la!
you are so strange!
but i must tell you how it went off.
we were married, you know, at st. clements, because wickhams lodgings were in that parish.
and it was settled that we should all be there by eleven oclock.
my uncle and aunt and i were to go together; and the others were to meet us at the church.
well, monday morning came, and i was in such a fuss!
i was so afraid, you know, that something would happen to put it off, and then i should have gone quite distracted.
and there was my aunt, all the time i was dressing, preaching and talking away just as if she was reading a sermon.
however, i did not hear above one word in ten, for i was thinking, you may suppose, of my dear wickham.
i longed to know whether he would be married in his blue coat.
well, and so we breakfasted at ten as usual: i thought it would never be over; for, by the bye, you are to understand that my uncle and aunt were horrid unpleasant all the time i was with them.
if youll believe me, i did not once put my foot out of doors, though i was there a fortnight.
not one party, or scheme, or anything!
to be sure, london was rather thin, but, however, the little theatre was open.
well, and so, just as the carriage came to the door, my uncle was called away upon business to that horrid man mr. stone.
and then, you know, when once they get together, there is no end of it.
well, i was so frightened i did not know what to do, for my uncle was to give me away; and if we were beyond the hour we could not be married all day.
but, luckily, he came back again in ten minutes time, and then we all set out.
however, i recollected afterwards, that if he had been prevented going, the wedding need not be put off, for mr. darcy might have done as well.
mr. darcy!
repeated elizabeth, in utter amazement.
oh, yes!
he was to come there with wickham, you know.
but, gracious me!
i quite forgot!
i ought not to have said a word about it.
i promised them so faithfully!
what will wickham say?
it was to be such a secret!
if it was to be a secret, said jane, say not another word on the subject.
you may depend upon my seeking no further.
oh, certainly, said elizabeth, though burning with curiosity; we will ask you no questions.
thank you, said lydia; for if you did, i should certainly tell you all, and then wickham would be so angry.
on such encouragement to ask, elizabeth was forced to put it out of her power, by running away.
but to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible; or at least it was impossible not to try for information.
mr. darcy had been at her sisters wedding.
it was exactly a scene, and exactly among people, where he had apparently least to do, and least temptation to go.
conjectures as to the meaning of it, rapid and wild, hurried into her brain; but she was satisfied with none.
those that best pleased her, as placing his conduct in the noblest light, seemed most improbable.
she could not bear such suspense; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper, wrote a short letter to her aunt, to request an explanation of what lydia had dropped, if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been intended.
you may readily comprehend, she added, what my curiosity must be to know how a person unconnected with any of us, and, comparatively speaking, a stranger to our family, should have been amongst you at such a time.
pray write instantly, and let me understand itunless it is, for very cogent reasons, to remain in the secrecy which lydia seems to think necessary; and then i must endeavour to be satisfied with ignorance.
not that i shall, though, she added to herself, and she finished the letter; and, my dear aunt, if you do not tell me in an honourable manner, i shall certainly be reduced to tricks and stratagems to find it out.
janes delicate sense of honour would not allow her to speak to elizabeth privately of what lydia had let fall; elizabeth was glad of it:till it appeared whether her inquiries would receive any satisfaction, she had rather be without a confidante.
illustration: i am sure she did not listen.
chapter lii.
illustration elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to her letter as soon as she possibly could.
she was no sooner in possession of it, than hurrying into the little copse, where she was least likely to be interrupted, she sat down on one of the benches, and prepared to be happy; for the length of the letter convinced her that it did not contain a denial.
right gracechurch street, sept. 6.  my dear niece, i have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole morning to answering it, as i foresee that a little writing will not comprise what i have to tell you.
i must confess myself surprised by your application; i did not expect it from you.
dont think me angry, however, for i only mean to let you know, that i had not imagined such inquiries to be necessary on your side.
if you do not choose to understand me, forgive my impertinence.
your uncle is as much surprised as i am; and nothing but the belief of your being a party concerned would have allowed him to act as he has done.
but if you are really innocent and ignorant, i must be more explicit.
on the very day of my coming home from longbourn, your uncle had a most unexpected visitor.
mr. darcy called, and was shut up with him several hours.
it was all over before i arrived; so my curiosity was not so dreadfully racked as yours seems to have been.
he came to tell mr. gardiner that he had found out where your sister and mr. wickham were, and that he had seen and talked with them bothwickham repeatedly, lydia once.
from what i can collect, he left derbyshire only one day after ourselves, and came to town with the resolution of hunting for them.
the motive professed was his conviction of its being owing to himself that wickhams worthlessness had not been so well known as to make it impossible for any young woman of character to love or confide in him.
he generously imputed the whole to his mistaken pride, and confessed that he had before thought it beneath him to lay his private actions open to the world.
his character was to speak for itself.
he called it, therefore, his duty to step forward, and endeavour to remedy an evil which had been brought on by himself.
if he had another motive, i am sure it would never disgrace him.
he had been some days in town before he was able to discover them; but he had something to direct his search, which was more than we had; and the consciousness of this was another reason for his resolving to follow us.
there is a lady, it seems, a mrs. younge, who was some time ago governess to miss darcy, and was dismissed from her charge on some cause of disapprobation, though he did not say what.
she then took a large house in edward street, and has since maintained herself by letting lodgings.
this mrs. younge was, he knew, intimately acquainted with wickham; and he went to her for intelligence of him, as soon as he got to town.
but it was two or three days before he could get from her what he wanted.
she would not betray her trust, i suppose, without bribery and corruption, for she really did know where her friend was to be found.
wickham, indeed, had gone to her on their first arrival in london; and had she been able to receive them into her house, they would have taken up their abode with her.
at length, however, our kind friend procured the wishedfor direction.
they were in  street.
he saw wickham, and afterwards insisted on seeing lydia.
his first object with her, he acknowledged, had been to persuade her to quit her present disgraceful situation, and return to her friends as soon as they could be prevailed on to receive her, offering his assistance as far as it would go.
but he found lydia absolutely resolved on remaining where she was.
she cared for none of her friends; she wanted no help of his; she would not hear of leaving wickham.
she was sure they should be married some time or other, and it did not much signify when.
since such were her feelings, it only remained, he thought, to secure and expedite a marriage, which, in his very first conversation with wickham, he easily learnt had never been his design.
he confessed himself obliged to leave the regiment on account of some debts of honour which were very pressing; and scrupled not to lay all the ill consequences of lydias flight on her own folly alone.
he meant to resign his commission immediately; and as to his future situation, he could conjecture very little about it.
he must go somewhere, but he did not know where, and he knew he should have nothing to live on.
mr. darcy asked why he did not marry your sister at once.
though mr. bennet was not imagined to be very rich, he would have been able to do something for him, and his situation must have been benefited by marriage.
but he found, in reply to this question, that wickham still cherished the hope of more effectually making his fortune by marriage, in some other country.
under such circumstances, however, he was not likely to be proof against the temptation of immediate relief.
they met several times, for there was much to be discussed.
wickham, of course, wanted more than he could get; but at length was reduced to be reasonable.
everything being settled between them, mr. darcys next step was to make your uncle acquainted with it, and he first called in gracechurch street the evening before i came home.
but mr. gardiner could not be seen; and mr. darcy found, on further inquiry, that your father was still with him, but would quit town the next morning.
he did not judge your father to be a person whom he could so properly consult as your uncle, and therefore readily postponed seeing him till after the departure of the former.
he did not leave his name, and till the next day it was only known that a gentleman had called on business.
on saturday he came again.
your father was gone, your uncle at home, and, as i said before, they had a great deal of talk together.
they met again on sunday, and then i saw him too.
it was not all settled before monday: as soon as it was, the express was sent off to longbourn.
but our visitor was very obstinate.
i fancy, lizzy, that obstinacy is the real defect of his character, after all.
he has been accused of many faults at different times; but this is the true one.
nothing was to be done that he did not do himself; though i am sure (and i do not speak it to be thanked, therefore say nothing about it) your uncle would most readily have settled the whole.
they battled it together for a long time, which was more than either the gentleman or lady concerned in it deserved.
but at last your uncle was forced to yield, and instead of being allowed to be of use to his niece, was forced to put up with only having the probable credit of it, which went sorely against the grain; and i really believe your letter this morning gave him great pleasure, because it required an explanation that would rob him of his borrowed feathers, and give the praise where it was due.
but, lizzy, this must go no further than yourself, or jane at most.
you know pretty well, i suppose, what has been done for the young people.
his debts are to be paid, amounting, i believe, to considerably more than a thousand pounds, another thousand in addition to her own settled upon her, and his commission purchased.
the reason why all this was to be done by him alone, was such as i have given above.
it was owing to him, to his reserve and want of proper consideration, that wickhams character had been so misunderstood, and consequently that he had been received and noticed as he was.
perhaps there was some truth in this; though i doubt whether his reserve, or anybodys reserve can be answerable for the event.
but in spite of all this fine talking, my dear lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured that your uncle would never have yielded, if we had not given him credit for another interest in the affair.
when all this was resolved on, he returned again to his friends, who were still staying at pemberley; but it was agreed that he should be in london once more when the wedding took place, and all money matters were then to receive the last finish.
i believe i have now told you everything.
it is a relation which you tell me is to give you great surprise; i hope at least it will not afford you any displeasure.
lydia came to us, and wickham had constant admission to the house.
he was exactly what he had been when i knew him in hertfordshire; but i would not tell you how little i was satisfied with her behaviour while she stayed with us, if i had not perceived, by janes letter last wednesday, that her conduct on coming home was exactly of a piece with it, and therefore what i now tell you can give you no fresh pain.
i talked to her repeatedly in the most serious manner, representing to her the wickedness of what she had done, and all the unhappiness she had brought on her family.
if she heard me, it was by good luck, for i am sure she did not listen.
i was sometimes quite provoked; but then i recollected my dear elizabeth and jane, and for their sakes had patience with her.
mr. darcy was punctual in his return, and, as lydia informed you, attended the wedding.
he dined with us the next day, and was to leave town again on wednesday or thursday.
will you be very angry with me, my dear lizzy, if i take this opportunity of saying (what i was never bold enough to say before) how much i like him?
his behaviour to us has, in every respect, been as pleasing as when we were in derbyshire.
his understanding and opinions all please me; he wants nothing but a little more liveliness, and that, if he marry prudently, his wife may teach him.
i thought him very sly; he hardly ever mentioned your name.
but slyness seems the fashion.
pray forgive me, if i have been very presuming, or at least do not punish me so far as to exclude me from p. i shall never be quite happy till i have been all round the park.
a low phaeton with a nice little pair of ponies would be the very thing.
but i must write no more.
the children have been wanting me this half hour.
yours, very sincerely, m. gardiner.
the contents of this letter threw elizabeth into a flutter of spirits, in which it was difficult to determine whether pleasure or pain bore the greatest share.
the vague and unsettled suspicions which uncertainty had produced, of what mr. darcy might have been doing to forward her sisters matchwhich she had feared to encourage, as an exertion of goodness too great to be probable, and at the same time dreaded to be just, from the pain of obligationwere proved beyond their greatest extent to be true!
he had followed them purposely to town, he had taken on himself all the trouble and mortification attendant on such a research; in which supplication had been necessary to a woman whom he must abominate and despise, and where he was reduced to meet, frequently meet, reason with, persuade, and finally bribe the man whom he always most wished to avoid, and whose very name it was punishment to him to pronounce.
he had done all this for a girl whom he could neither regard nor esteem.
her heart did whisper that he had done it for her.
but it was a hope shortly checked by other considerations; and she soon felt that even her vanity was insufficient, when required to depend on his affection for her, for a woman who had already refused him, as able to overcome a sentiment so natural as abhorrence against relationship with wickham.
brotherinlaw of wickham!
every kind of pride must revolt from the connection.
he had, to be sure, done much.
she was ashamed to think how much.
but he had given a reason for his interference, which asked no extraordinary stretch of belief.
it was reasonable that he should feel he had been wrong; he had liberality, and he had the means of exercising it; and though she would not place herself as his principal inducement, she could perhaps believe, that remaining partiality for her might assist his endeavours in a cause where her peace of mind must be materially concerned.
it was painful, exceedingly painful, to know that they were under obligations to a person who could never receive a return.
they owed the restoration of lydia, her character, everything to him.
oh, how heartily did she grieve over every ungracious sensation she had ever encouraged, every saucy speech she had ever directed towards him!
for herself she was humbled; but she was proud of him,proud that in a cause of compassion and honour he had been able to get the better of himself.
she read over her aunts commendation of him again and again.
it was hardly enough; but it pleased her.
she was even sensible of some pleasure, though mixed with regret, on finding how steadfastly both she and her uncle had been persuaded that affection and confidence subsisted between mr. darcy and herself.
she was roused from her seat and her reflections, by someones approach; and, before she could strike into another path, she was overtaken by wickham.
i am afraid i interrupt your solitary ramble, my dear sister?
said he, as he joined her.
you certainly do, she replied with a smile; but it does not follow that the interruption must be unwelcome.
i should be sorry, indeed, if it were.
we were always good friends, and now we are better.
true.
are the others coming out?
i do not know.
mrs. bennet and lydia are going in the carriage to meryton.
and so, my dear sister, i find, from our uncle and aunt, that you have actually seen pemberley.
she replied in the affirmative.
i almost envy you the pleasure, and yet i believe it would be too much for me, or else i could take it in my way to newcastle.
and you saw the old housekeeper, i suppose?
poor reynolds, she was always very fond of me.
but of course she did not mention my name to you.
yes, she did.
and what did she say?
that you were gone into the army, and she was afraid hadnot turned out well.
at such a distance as that, you know, things are strangely misrepresented.
certainly, he replied, biting his lips.
elizabeth hoped she had silenced him; but he soon afterwards said, i was surprised to see darcy in town last month.
we passed each other several times.
i wonder what he can be doing there.
perhaps preparing for his marriage with miss de bourgh, said elizabeth.
it must be something particular to take him there at this time of year.
undoubtedly.
did you see him while you were at lambton?
i thought i understood from the gardiners that you had.
yes; he introduced us to his sister.
and do you like her?
very much.
i have heard, indeed, that she is uncommonly improved within this year or two.
when i last saw her, she was not very promising.
i am very glad you liked her.
i hope she will turn out well.
i dare say she will; she has got over the most trying age.
did you go by the village of kympton?
i do not recollect that we did.
i mention it because it is the living which i ought to have had.
a most delightful place!
excellent parsonagehouse!
it would have suited me in every respect.
how should you have liked making sermons?
exceedingly well.
i should have considered it as part of my duty, and the exertion would soon have been nothing.
one ought not to repine; but, to be sure, it would have been such a thing for me!
the quiet, the retirement of such a life, would have answered all my ideas of happiness!
but it was not to be.
did you ever hear darcy mention the circumstance when you were in kent?
i have heard from authority, which i thought as good, that it was left you conditionally only, and at the will of the present patron.
you have!
yes, there was something in that; i told you so from the first, you may remember.
i did hear, too, that there was a time when sermonmaking was not so palatable to you as it seems to be at present; that you actually declared your resolution of never taking orders, and that the business had been compromised accordingly.
you did!
and it was not wholly without foundation.
you may remember what i told you on that point, when first we talked of it.
they were now almost at the door of the house, for she had walked fast to get rid of him; and unwilling, for her sisters sake, to provoke him, she only said in reply, with a goodhumoured smile, come, mr. wickham, we are brother and sister, you know.
do not let us quarrel about the past.
in future, i hope we shall be always of one mind.
she held out her hand: he kissed it with affectionate gallantry, though he hardly knew how to look, and they entered the house.
illustration: mr. darcy with him.
chapter liii.
illustration mr. wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation, that he never again distressed himself, or provoked his dear sister elizabeth, by introducing the subject of it; and she was pleased to find that she had said enough to keep him quiet.
the day of his and lydias departure soon came; and mrs. bennet was forced to submit to a separation, which, as her husband by no means entered into her scheme of their all going to newcastle, was likely to continue at least a twelvemonth.
oh, my dear lydia, she cried, when shall we meet again?
oh, lord!
i dont know.
not these two or three years, perhaps.
write to me very often, my dear.
as often as i can.
but you know married women have never much time for writing.
my sisters may write to me.
they will have nothing else to do.
mr. wickhams adieus were much more affectionate than his wifes.
he smiled, looked handsome, and said many pretty things.
he is as fine a fellow, said mr. bennet, as soon as they were out of the house, as ever i saw.
he simpers, and smirks, and makes love to us all.
i am prodigiously proud of him.
i defy even sir william lucas himself to produce a more valuable soninlaw.
the loss of her daughter made mrs. bennet very dull for several days.
i often think, said she, that there is nothing so bad as parting with ones friends.
one seems so forlorn without them.
this is the consequence, you see, madam, of marrying a daughter, said elizabeth.
it must make you better satisfied that your other four are single.
it is no such thing.
lydia does not leave me because she is married; but only because her husbands regiment happens to be so far off.
if that had been nearer, she would not have gone so soon.
but the spiritless condition which this event threw her into was shortly relieved, and her mind opened again to the agitation of hope, by an article of news which then began to be in circulation.
the housekeeper at netherfield had received orders to prepare for the arrival of her master, who was coming down in a day or two, to shoot there for several weeks.
mrs. bennet was quite in the fidgets.
she looked at jane, and smiled, and shook her head, by turns.
well, well, and so mr. bingley is coming down, sister, (for mrs. philips first brought her the news).
well, so much the better.
not that i care about it, though.
he is nothing to us, you know, and i am sure i never want to see him again.
but, however, he is very welcome to come to netherfield, if he likes it.
and who knows what may happen?
but that is nothing to us.
you know, sister, we agreed long ago never to mention a word about it.
and so, it is quite certain he is coming?
you may depend on it, replied the other, for mrs. nichols was in meryton last night: i saw her passing by, and went out myself on purpose to know the truth of it; and she told me that it was certainly true.
he comes down on thursday, at the latest, very likely on wednesday.
she was going to the butchers, she told me, on purpose to order in some meat on wednesday, and she has got three couple of ducks just fit to be killed.
miss bennet had not been able to hear of his coming without changing colour.
it was many months since she had mentioned his name to elizabeth; but now, as soon as they were alone together, she said, i saw you look at me today, lizzy, when my aunt told us of the present report; and i know i appeared distressed; but dont imagine it was from any silly cause.
i was only confused for the moment, because i felt that i should be looked at.
i do assure you that the news does not affect me either with pleasure or pain.
i am glad of one thing, that he comes alone; because we shall see the less of him.
not that i am afraid of myself, but i dread other peoples remarks.
elizabeth did not know what to make of it.
had she not seen him in derbyshire, she might have supposed him capable of coming there with no other view than what was acknowledged; but she still thought him partial to jane, and she wavered as to the greater probability of his coming there with his friends permission, or being bold enough to come without it.
yet it is hard, she sometimes thought, that this poor man cannot come to a house, which he has legally hired, without raising all this speculation!
i will leave him to himself.
in spite of what her sister declared, and really believed to be her feelings, in the expectation of his arrival, elizabeth could easily perceive that her spirits were affected by it.
they were more disturbed, more unequal, than she had often seen them.
the subject which had been so warmly canvassed between their parents, about a twelvemonth ago, was now brought forward again.
as soon as ever mr. bingley comes, my dear, said mrs. bennet, you will wait on him, of course.
no, no.
you forced me into visiting him last year, and promised, if i went to see him, he should marry one of my daughters.
but it ended in nothing, and i will not be sent on a fools errand again.
his wife represented to him how absolutely necessary such an attention would be from all the neighbouring gentlemen, on his returning to netherfield.
tis an etiquette i despise, said he.
if he wants our society, let him seek it.
he knows where we live.
i will not spend my hours in running after my neighbours every time they go away and come back again.
well, all i know is, that it will be abominably rude if you do not wait on him.
but, however, that shant prevent my asking him to dine here, i am determined.
we must have mrs. long and the gouldings soon.
that will make thirteen with ourselves, so there will be just room at table for him.
consoled by this resolution, she was the better able to bear her husbands incivility; though it was very mortifying to know that her neighbours might all see mr. bingley, in consequence of it, before they did.
as the day of his arrival drew near, i begin to be sorry that he comes at all, said jane to her sister.
it would be nothing; i could see him with perfect indifference; but i can hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talked of.
my mother means well; but she does not know, no one can know, how much i suffer from what she says.
happy shall i be when his stay at netherfield is over!
i wish i could say anything to comfort you, replied elizabeth; but it is wholly out of my power.
you must feel it; and the usual satisfaction of preaching patience to a sufferer is denied me, because you have always so much.
mr. bingley arrived.
mrs. bennet, through the assistance of servants, contrived to have the earliest tidings of it, that the period of anxiety and fretfulness on her side be as long as it could.
she counted the days that must intervene before their invitation could be senthopeless of seeing him before.
but on the third morning after his arrival in hertfordshire, she saw him from her dressingroom window enter the paddock, and ride towards the house.
her daughters were eagerly called to partake of her joy.
jane resolutely kept her place at the table; but elizabeth, to satisfy her mother, went to the windowshe lookedshe saw mr. darcy with him, and sat down again by her sister.
there is a gentleman with him, mamma, said kitty; who can it be?
some acquaintance or other, my dear, i suppose; i am sure i do not know.
la!
replied kitty, it looks just like that man that used to be with him before.
mr. whats his namethat tall, proud man.
good gracious!
mr. darcy!and so it does, i vow.
well, any friend of mr. bingleys will always be welcome here, to be sure; but else i must say that i hate the very sight of him.
jane looked at elizabeth with surprise and concern.
she knew but little of their meeting in derbyshire, and therefore felt for the awkwardness which must attend her sister, in seeing him almost for the first time after receiving his explanatory letter.
both sisters were uncomfortable enough.
each felt for the other, and of course for themselves; and their mother talked on of her dislike of mr. darcy, and her resolution to be civil to him only as mr. bingleys friend, without being heard by either of them.
but elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not yet be suspected by jane, to whom she had never yet had courage to show mrs. gardiners letter, or to relate her own change of sentiment towards him.
to jane, he could be only a man whose proposals she had refused, and whose merits she had undervalued; but to her own more extensive information, he was the person to whom the whole family were indebted for the first of benefits, and whom she regarded herself with an interest, if not quite so tender, at least as reasonable and just, as what jane felt for bingley.
her astonishment at his comingat his coming to netherfield, to longbourn, and voluntarily seeking her again, was almost equal to what she had known on first witnessing his altered behaviour in derbyshire.
the colour which had been driven from her face returned for half a minute with an additional glow, and a smile of delight added lustre to her eyes, as she thought for that space of time that his affection and wishes must still be unshaken; but she would not be secure.
let me first see how he behaves, said she; it will then be early enough for expectation.
she sat intently at work, striving to be composed, and without daring to lift up her eyes, till anxious curiosity carried them to the face of her sister as the servant was approaching the door.
jane looked a little paler than usual, but more sedate than elizabeth had expected.
on the gentlemens appearing, her colour increased; yet she received them with tolerable ease, and with a propriety of behaviour equally free from any symptom of resentment, or any unnecessary complaisance.
elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow, and sat down again to her work, with an eagerness which it did not often command.
she had ventured only one glance at darcy.
he looked serious as usual; and, she thought, more as he had been used to look in hertfordshire, than as she had seen him at pemberley.
but, perhaps, he could not in her mothers presence be what he was before her uncle and aunt.
it was a painful, but not an improbable, conjecture.
bingley she had likewise seen for an instant, and in that short period saw him looking both pleased and embarrassed.
he was received by mrs. bennet with a degree of civility which made her two daughters ashamed, especially when contrasted with the cold and ceremonious politeness of her courtesy and address of his friend.
elizabeth particularly, who knew that her mother owed to the latter the preservation of her favourite daughter from irremediable infamy, was hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a distinction so ill applied.
darcy, after inquiring of her how mr. and mrs. gardiner dida question which she could not answer without confusionsaid scarcely anything.
he was not seated by her: perhaps that was the reason of his silence; but it had not been so in derbyshire.
there he had talked to her friends when he could not to herself.
but now several minutes elapsed, without bringing the sound of his voice; and when occasionally, unable to resist the impulse of curiosity, she raised her eyes to his face, she as often found him looking at jane as at herself, and frequently on no object but the ground.
more thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please, than when they last met, were plainly expressed.
she was disappointed, and angry with herself for being so.
could i expect it to be otherwise?
said she.
yet why did he come?
she was in no humour for conversation with anyone but himself; and to him she had hardly courage to speak.
she inquired after his sister, but could do no more.
it is a long time, mr. bingley, since you went away, said mrs. bennet.
he readily agreed to it.
i began to be afraid you would never come back again.
people did say, you meant to quit the place entirely at michaelmas; but, however, i hope it is not true.
a great many changes have happened in the neighbourhood since you went away.
miss lucas is married and settled: and one of my own daughters.
i suppose you have heard of it; indeed, you must have seen it in the papers.
it was in the times and the courier, i know; though it was not put in as it ought to be.
it was only said, lately, george wickham, esq., to miss lydia bennet, without there being a syllable said of her father, or the place where she lived, or anything.
it was my brother gardiners drawing up, too, and i wonder how he came to make such an awkward business of it.
did you see it?
bingley replied that he did, and made his congratulations.
elizabeth dared not lift up her eyes.
how mr. darcy looked, therefore, she could not tell.
it is a delightful thing, to be sure, to have a daughter well married, continued her mother; but at the same time, mr. bingley, it is very hard to have her taken away from me.
they are gone down to newcastle, a place quite northward it seems, and there they are to stay, i do not know how long.
his regiment is there; for i suppose you have heard of his leaving the shire, and of his being gone into the regulars.
thank heaven!
he has some friends, though, perhaps, not so many as he deserves.
elizabeth, who knew this to be levelled at mr. darcy, was in such misery of shame that she could hardly keep her seat.
it drew from her, however, the exertion of speaking, which nothing else had so effectually done before; and she asked bingley whether he meant to make any stay in the country at present.
a few weeks, he believed.
when you have killed all your own birds, mr. bingley, said her mother, i beg you will come here and shoot as many as you please on mr. bennets manor.
i am sure he will be vastly happy to oblige you, and will save all the best of the coveys for you.
elizabeths misery increased at such unnecessary, such officious attention!
were the same fair prospect to arise at present, as had flattered them a year ago, everything, she was persuaded, would be hastening to the same vexatious conclusion.
at that instant she felt, that years of happiness could not make jane or herself amends for moments of such painful confusion.
the first wish of my heart, said she to herself, is never more to be in company with either of them.
their society can afford no pleasure that will atone for such wretchedness as this!
let me never see either one or the other again!
yet the misery, for which years of happiness were to offer no compensation, received soon afterwards material relief, from observing how much the beauty of her sister rekindled the admiration of her former lover.
when first he came in, he had spoken to her but little, but every five minutes seemed to be giving her more of his attention.
he found her as handsome as she had been last year; as goodnatured, and as unaffected, though not quite so chatty.
jane was anxious that no difference should be perceived in her at all, and was really persuaded that she talked as much as ever; but her mind was so busily engaged, that she did not always know when she was silent.
when the gentlemen rose to go away, mrs. bennet was mindful of her intended civility, and they were invited and engaged to dine at longbourn in a few days time.
you are quite a visit in my debt, mr. bingley, she added; for when you went to town last winter, you promised to take a family dinner with us as soon as you returned.
i have not forgot, you see; and i assure you i was very much disappointed that you did not come back and keep your engagement.
bingley looked a little silly at this reflection, and said something of his concern at having been prevented by business.
they then went away.
mrs. bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine there that day; but, though she always kept a very good table, she did not think anything less than two courses could be good enough for a man on whom she had such anxious designs, or satisfy the appetite and pride of one who had ten thousand a year.
illustration: jane happened to look round  chapter liv.
illustration as soon as they were gone, elizabeth walked out to recover her spirits; or, in other words, to dwell without interruption on those subjects which must deaden them more.
mr. darcys behaviour astonished and vexed her.
why, if he came only to be silent, grave, and indifferent, said she, did he come at all?
she could settle it in no way that gave her pleasure.
he could be still amiable, still pleasing to my uncle and aunt, when he was in town; and why not to me?
if he fears me, why come hither?
if he no longer cares for me, why silent?
teasing, teasing man!
i will think no more about him.
her resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach of her sister, who joined her with a cheerful look which showed her better satisfied with their visitors than elizabeth.
now, said she, that this first meeting is over, i feel perfectly easy.
i know my own strength, and i shall never be embarrassed again by his coming.
i am glad he dines here on tuesday.
it will then be publicly seen, that on both sides we meet only as common and indifferent acquaintance.
yes, very indifferent, indeed, said elizabeth, laughingly.
oh, jane!
take care.
my dear lizzy, you cannot think me so weak as to be in danger now.
i think you are in very great danger of making him as much in love with you as ever.
they did not see the gentlemen again till tuesday; and mrs. bennet, in the meanwhile, was giving way to all the happy schemes which the goodhumour and common politeness of bingley, in half an hours visit, had revived.
on tuesday there was a large party assembled at longbourn; and the two who were most anxiously expected, to the credit of their punctuality as sportsmen, were in very good time.
when they repaired to the diningroom, elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether bingley would take the place which, in all their former parties, had belonged to him, by her sister.
her prudent mother, occupied by the same ideas, forbore to invite him to sit by herself.
on entering the room, he seemed to hesitate; but jane happened to look round, and happened to smile: it was decided.
he placed himself by her.
elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards his friend.
he bore it with noble indifference; and she would have imagined that bingley had received his sanction to be happy, had she not seen his eyes likewise turned towards mr. darcy, with an expression of halflaughing alarm.
his behaviour to her sister was such during dinnertime as showed an admiration of her, which, though more guarded than formerly, persuaded elizabeth, that, if left wholly to himself, janes happiness, and his own, would be speedily secured.
though she dared not depend upon the consequence, she yet received pleasure from observing his behaviour.
it gave her all the animation that her spirits could boast; for she was in no cheerful humour.
mr. darcy was almost as far from her as the table could divide them.
he was on one side of her mother.
she knew how little such a situation would give pleasure to either, or make either appear to advantage.
she was not near enough to hear any of their discourse; but she could see how seldom they spoke to each other, and how formal and cold was their manner whenever they did.
her mothers ungraciousness made the sense of what they owed him more painful to elizabeths mind; and she would, at times, have given anything to be privileged to tell him, that his kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of the family.
she was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity of bringing them together; that the whole of the visit would not pass away without enabling them to enter into something more of conversation, than the mere ceremonious salutation attending his entrance.
anxious and uneasy, the period which passed in the drawingroom before the gentlemen came, was wearisome and dull to a degree that almost made her uncivil.
she looked forward to their entrance as the point on which all her chance of pleasure for the evening must depend.
if he does not come to me, then, said she, i shall give him up for ever.
the gentlemen came; and she thought he looked as if he would have answered her hopes; but, alas!
the ladies had crowded round the table, where miss bennet was making tea, and elizabeth pouring out the coffee, in so close a confederacy, that there was not a single vacancy near her which would admit of a chair.
and on the gentlemens approaching, one of the girls moved closer to her than ever, and said, in a whisper, the men shant come and part us, i am determined.
we want none of them; do we?
darcy had walked away to another part of the room.
she followed him with her eyes, envied everyone to whom he spoke, had scarcely patience enough to help anybody to coffee, and then was enraged against herself for being so silly!
a man who has once been refused!
how could i ever be foolish enough to expect a renewal of his love?
is there one among the sex who would not protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the same woman?
there is no indignity so abhorrent to their feelings.
she was a little revived, however, by his bringing back his coffeecup himself; and she seized the opportunity of saying, is your sister at pemberley still?
yes; she will remain there till christmas.
and quite alone?
have all her friends left her?
mrs. annesley is with her.
the others have been gone on to scarborough these three weeks.
she could think of nothing more to say; but if he wished to converse with her, he might have better success.
he stood by her, however, for some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young ladys whispering to elizabeth again, he walked away.
when the tea things were removed, and the card tables placed, the ladies all rose; and elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by him, when all her views were overthrown, by seeing him fall a victim to her mothers rapacity for whist players, and in a few moments after seated with the rest of the party.
she now lost every expectation of pleasure.
they were confined for the evening at different tables; and she had nothing to hope, but that his eyes were so often turned towards her side of the room, as to make him play as unsuccessfully as herself.
mrs. bennet had designed to keep the two netherfield gentlemen to supper; but their carriage was, unluckily, ordered before any of the others, and she had no opportunity of detaining them.
well, girls, said she, as soon as they were left to themselves, what say you to the day?
i think everything has passed off uncommonly well, i assure you.
the dinner was as well dressed as any i ever saw.
the venison was roasted to a turnand everybody said, they never saw so fat a haunch.
the soup was fifty times better than what we had at the lucases last week; and even mr. darcy acknowledged that the partridges were remarkably well done; and i suppose he has two or three french cooks at least.
and, my dear jane, i never saw you look in greater beauty.
mrs. long said so too, for i asked her whether you did not.
and what do you think she said besides?
ah!
mrs. bennet, we shall have her at netherfield at last!
she did, indeed.
i do think mrs. long is as good a creature as ever livedand her nieces are very pretty behaved girls, and not at all handsome: i like them prodigiously.
illustration: mrs. long and her nieces.
mrs. bennet, in short, was in very great spirits: she had seen enough of bingleys behaviour to jane to be convinced that she would get him at last; and her expectations of advantage to her family, when in a happy humour, were so far beyond reason, that she was quite disappointed at not seeing him there again the next day, to make his proposals.
it has been a very agreeable day, said miss bennet to elizabeth.
the party seemed so well selected, so suitable one with the other.
i hope we may often meet again.
elizabeth smiled.
lizzy, you must not do so.
you must not suspect me.
it mortifies me.
i assure you that i have now learnt to enjoy his conversation as an agreeable and sensible young man without having a wish beyond it.
i am perfectly satisfied, from what his manners now are, that he never had any design of engaging my affection.
it is only that he is blessed with greater sweetness of address, and a stronger desire of generally pleasing, than any other man.
you are very cruel, said her sister, you will not let me smile, and are provoking me to it every moment.
how hard it is in some cases to be believed!
and how impossible in others!
but why should you wish to persuade me that i feel more than i acknowledge?
that is a question which i hardly know how to answer.
we all love to instruct, though we can teach only what is not worth knowing.
forgive me; and if you persist in indifference, do not make me your confidante.
illustration: lizzy, my dear, i want to speak to you.
chapter lv.
illustration a few days after this visit, mr. bingley called again, and alone.
his friend had left him that morning for london, but was to return home in ten days time.
he sat with them above an hour, and was in remarkably good spirits.
mrs. bennet invited him to dine with them; but, with many expressions of concern, he confessed himself engaged elsewhere.
next time you call, said she, i hope we shall be more lucky.
he should be particularly happy at any time, etc., etc.
; and if she would give him leave, would take an early opportunity of waiting on them.
can you come tomorrow?
yes, he had no engagement at all for tomorrow; and her invitation was accepted with alacrity.
he came, and in such very good time, that the ladies were none of them dressed.
in ran mrs. bennet to her daughters room, in her dressinggown, and with her hair half finished, crying out, my dear jane, make haste and hurry down.
he is comemr.
bingley is come.
he is, indeed.
make haste, make haste.
here, sarah, come to miss bennet this moment, and help her on with her gown.
never mind miss lizzys hair.
we will be down as soon as we can, said jane; but i dare say kitty is forwarder than either of us, for she went upstairs half an hour ago.
oh!
hang kitty!
what has she to do with it?
come, be quick, be quick!
where is your sash, my dear?
but when her mother was gone, jane would not be prevailed on to go down without one of her sisters.
the same anxiety to get them by themselves was visible again in the evening.
after tea, mr. bennet retired to the library, as was his custom, and mary went upstairs to her instrument.
two obstacles of the five being thus removed, mrs. bennet sat looking and winking at elizabeth and catherine for a considerable time, without making any impression on them.
elizabeth would not observe her; and when at last kitty did, she very innocently said, what is the matter, mamma?
what do you keep winking at me for?
what am i to do?
nothing, child, nothing.
i did not wink at you.
she then sat still five minutes longer; but unable to waste such a precious occasion, she suddenly got up, and saying to kitty, come here, my love, i want to speak to you, took her out of the room.
jane instantly gave a look at elizabeth which spoke her distress at such premeditation, and her entreaty that she would not give in to it.
in a few minutes, mrs. bennet half opened the door and called out, lizzy, my dear, i want to speak with you.
elizabeth was forced to go.
we may as well leave them by themselves, you know, said her mother as soon as she was in the hall.
kitty and i are going upstairs to sit in my dressingroom.
elizabeth made no attempt to reason with her mother, but remained quietly in the hall till she and kitty were out of sight, then returned into the drawingroom.
mrs. bennets schemes for this day were ineffectual.
bingley was everything that was charming, except the professed lover of her daughter.
his ease and cheerfulness rendered him a most agreeable addition to their evening party; and he bore with the illjudged officiousness of the mother, and heard all her silly remarks with a forbearance and command of countenance particularly grateful to the daughter.
he scarcely needed an invitation to stay supper; and before he went away an engagement was formed, chiefly through his own and mrs. bennets means, for his coming next morning to shoot with her husband.
after this day, jane said no more of her indifference.
not a word passed between the sisters concerning bingley; but elizabeth went to bed in the happy belief that all must speedily be concluded, unless mr. darcy returned within the stated time.
seriously, however, she felt tolerably persuaded that all this must have taken place with that gentlemans concurrence.
bingley was punctual to his appointment; and he and mr. bennet spent the morning together, as had been agreed on.
the latter was much more agreeable than his companion expected.
there was nothing of presumption or folly in bingley that could provoke his ridicule, or disgust him into silence; and he was more communicative, and less eccentric, than the other had ever seen him.
bingley of course returned with him to dinner; and in the evening mrs. bennets invention was again at work to get everybody away from him and her daughter.
elizabeth, who had a letter to write, went into the breakfastroom for that purpose soon after tea; for as the others were all going to sit down to cards, she could not be wanted to counteract her mothers schemes.
but on her returning to the drawingroom, when her letter was finished, she saw, to her infinite surprise, there was reason to fear that her mother had been too ingenious for her.
on opening the door, she perceived her sister and bingley standing together over the hearth, as if engaged in earnest conversation; and had this led to no suspicion, the faces of both, as they hastily turned round and moved away from each other, would have told it all.
their situation was awkward enough; but hers she thought was still worse.
not a syllable was uttered by either; and elizabeth was on the point of going away again, when bingley, who as well as the other had sat down, suddenly rose, and, whispering a few words to her sister, ran out of the room.
jane could have no reserves from elizabeth, where confidence would give pleasure; and, instantly embracing her, acknowledged, with the liveliest emotion, that she was the happiest creature in the world.
tis too much!
she added, by far too much.
i do not deserve it.
oh, why is not everybody as happy?
elizabeths congratulations were given with a sincerity, a warmth, a delight, which words could but poorly express.
every sentence of kindness was a fresh source of happiness to jane.
but she would not allow herself to stay with her sister, or say half that remained to be said, for the present.
i must go instantly to my mother, she cried.
i would not on any account trifle with her affectionate solicitude, or allow her to hear it from anyone but myself.
he is gone to my father already.
oh, lizzy, to know that what i have to relate will give such pleasure to all my dear family!
how shall i bear so much happiness?
she then hastened away to her mother, who had purposely broken up the cardparty, and was sitting upstairs with kitty.
elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled at the rapidity and ease with which an affair was finally settled, that had given them so many previous months of suspense and vexation.
and this, said she, is the end of all his friends anxious circumspection!
of all his sisters falsehood and contrivance!
the happiest, wisest, and most reasonable end!
in a few minutes she was joined by bingley, whose conference with her father had been short and to the purpose.
where is your sister?
said he hastily, as he opened the door.
with my mother upstairs.
she will be down in a moment, i dare say.
he then shut the door, and, coming up to her, claimed the good wishes and affection of a sister.
elizabeth honestly and heartily expressed her delight in the prospect of their relationship.
they shook hands with great cordiality; and then, till her sister came down, she had to listen to all he had to say of his own happiness, and of janes perfections; and in spite of his being a lover, elizabeth really believed all his expectations of felicity to be rationally founded, because they had for basis the excellent understanding and superexcellent disposition of jane, and a general similarity of feeling and taste between her and himself.
it was an evening of no common delight to them all; the satisfaction of miss bennets mind gave such a glow of sweet animation to her face, as made her look handsomer than ever.
kitty simpered and smiled, and hoped her turn was coming soon.
mrs. bennet could not give her consent, or speak her approbation in terms warm enough to satisfy her feelings, though she talked to bingley of nothing else, for half an hour; and when mr. bennet joined them at supper, his voice and manner plainly showed how really happy he was.
not a word, however, passed his lips in allusion to it, till their visitor took his leave for the night; but as soon as he was gone, he turned to his daughter and said, jane, i congratulate you.
you will be a very happy woman.
jane went to him instantly, kissed him, and thanked him for his goodness.
you are a good girl, he replied, and i have great pleasure in thinking you will be so happily settled.
i have not a doubt of your doing very well together.
your tempers are by no means unlike.
you are each of you so complying, that nothing will ever be resolved on; so easy, that every servant will cheat you; and so generous, that you will always exceed your income.
i hope not so.
imprudence or thoughtlessness in money matters would be unpardonable in me.
exceed their income!
my dear mr. bennet, cried his wife, what are you talking of?
why, he has four or five thousand a year, and very likely more.
then addressing her daughter, oh, my dear, dear jane, i am so happy!
i am sure i shant get a wink of sleep all night.
i knew how it would be.
i always said it must be so, at last.
i was sure you could not be so beautiful for nothing!
i remember, as soon as ever i saw him, when he first came into hertfordshire last year, i thought how likely it was that you should come together.
oh, he is the handsomest young man that ever was seen!
wickham, lydia, were all forgotten.
jane was beyond competition her favourite child.
at that moment she cared for no other.
her younger sisters soon began to make interest with her for objects of happiness which she might in future be able to dispense.
mary petitioned for the use of the library at netherfield; and kitty begged very hard for a few balls there every winter.
bingley, from this time, was of course a daily visitor at longbourn; coming frequently before breakfast, and always remaining till after supper; unless when some barbarous neighbour, who could not be enough detested, had given him an invitation to dinner, which he thought himself obliged to accept.
elizabeth had now but little time for conversation with her sister; for while he was present jane had no attention to bestow on anyone else: but she found herself considerably useful to both of them, in those hours of separation that must sometimes occur.
in the absence of jane, he always attached himself to elizabeth for the pleasure of talking of her; and when bingley was gone, jane constantly sought the same means of relief.
he has made me so happy, said she, one evening, by telling me that he was totally ignorant of my being in town last spring!
i had not believed it possible.
i suspected as much, replied elizabeth.
but how did he account for it?
it must have been his sisters doing.
they were certainly no friends to his acquaintance with me, which i cannot wonder at, since he might have chosen so much more advantageously in many respects.
but when they see, as i trust they will, that their brother is happy with me, they will learn to be contented, and we shall be on good terms again: though we can never be what we once were to each other.
that is the most unforgiving speech, said elizabeth, that i ever heard you utter.
good girl!
it would vex me, indeed, to see you again the dupe of miss bingleys pretended regard.
would you believe it, lizzy, that when he went to town last november he really loved me, and nothing but a persuasion of my being indifferent would have prevented his coming down again?
he made a little mistake, to be sure; but it is to the credit of his modesty.
this naturally introduced a panegyric from jane on his diffidence, and the little value he put on his own good qualities.
elizabeth was pleased to find that he had not betrayed the interference of his friend; for, though jane had the most generous and forgiving heart in the world, she knew it was a circumstance which must prejudice her against him.
i am certainly the most fortunate creature that ever existed!
cried jane.
oh, lizzy, why am i thus singled from my family, and blessed above them all?
if i could but see you as happy!
if there were but such another man for you!
if you were to give me forty such men i never could be so happy as you.
till i have your disposition, your goodness, i never can have your happiness.
no, no, let me shift for myself; and, perhaps, if i have very good luck, i may meet with another mr. collins in time.
the situation of affairs in the longbourn family could not be long a secret.
mrs. bennet was privileged to whisper it to mrs. philips, and she ventured, without any permission, to do the same by all her neighbours in meryton.
the bennets were speedily pronounced to be the luckiest family in the world; though only a few weeks before, when lydia had first run away, they had been generally proved to be marked out for misfortune.
illustration chapter lvi.
illustration one morning, about a week after bingleys engagement with jane had been formed, as he and the females of the family were sitting together in the diningroom, their attention was suddenly drawn to the window by the sound of a carriage; and they perceived a chaise and four driving up the lawn.
it was too early in the morning for visitors; and besides, the equipage did not answer to that of any of their neighbours.
the horses were post; and neither the carriage, nor the livery of the servant who preceded it, were familiar to them.
as it was certain, however, that somebody was coming, bingley instantly prevailed on miss bennet to avoid the confinement of such an intrusion, and walk away with him into the shrubbery.
they both set off; and the conjectures of the remaining three continued, though with little satisfaction, till the door was thrown open, and their visitor entered.
it was lady catherine de bourgh.
they were of course all intending to be surprised: but their astonishment was beyond their expectation; and on the part of mrs. bennet and kitty, though she was perfectly unknown to them, even inferior to what elizabeth felt.
she entered the room with an air more than usually ungracious, made no other reply to elizabeths salutation than a slight inclination of the head, and sat down without saying a word.
elizabeth had mentioned her name to her mother on her ladyships entrance, though no request of introduction had been made.
mrs. bennet, all amazement, though flattered by having a guest of such high importance, received her with the utmost politeness.
after sitting for a moment in silence, she said, very stiffly, to elizabeth, i hope you are well, miss bennet.
that lady, i suppose, is your mother?
elizabeth replied very concisely that she was.
and that, i suppose, is one of your sisters?
yes, madam, said mrs. bennet, delighted to speak to a lady catherine.
she is my youngest girl but one.
my youngest of all is lately married, and my eldest is somewhere about the ground, walking with a young man, who, i believe, will soon become a part of the family.
you have a very small park here, returned lady catherine, after a short silence.
it is nothing in comparison of rosings, my lady, i dare say; but, i assure you, it is much larger than sir william lucass.
this must be a most inconvenient sittingroom for the evening in summer: the windows are full west.
mrs. bennet assured her that they never sat there after dinner; and then added, may i take the liberty of asking your ladyship whether you left mr. and mrs. collins well?
yes, very well.
i saw them the night before last.
elizabeth now expected that she would produce a letter for her from charlotte, as it seemed the only probable motive for her calling.
but no letter appeared, and she was completely puzzled.
mrs. bennet, with great civility, begged her ladyship to take some refreshment: but lady catherine very resolutely, and not very politely, declined eating anything; and then, rising up, said to elizabeth, miss bennet, there seemed to be a prettyish kind of a little wilderness on one side of your lawn.
i should be glad to take a turn in it, if you will favour me with your company.
go, my dear, cried her mother, and show her ladyship about the different walks.
i think she will be pleased with the hermitage.
elizabeth obeyed; and, running into her own room for her parasol, attended her noble guest downstairs.
as they passed through the hall, lady catherine opened the doors into the diningparlour and drawingroom, and pronouncing them, after a short survey, to be decentlooking rooms, walked on.
her carriage remained at the door, and elizabeth saw that her waitingwoman was in it.
they proceeded in silence along the gravel walk that led to the copse; elizabeth was determined to make no effort for conversation with a woman who was now more than usually insolent and disagreeable.
illustration: after a short survey copyright 1894 by george allen.
how could i ever think her like her nephew?
said she, as she looked in her face.
as soon as they entered the copse, lady catherine began in the following manner: you can be at no loss, miss bennet, to understand the reason of my journey hither.
your own heart, your own conscience, must tell you why i come.
elizabeth looked with unaffected astonishment.
indeed, you are mistaken, madam; i have not been at all able to account for the honour of seeing you here.
miss bennet, replied her ladyship, in an angry tone, you ought to know that i am not to be trifled with.
but however insincere you may choose to be, you shall not find me so.
my character has ever been celebrated for its sincerity and frankness; and in a cause of such moment as this, i shall certainly not depart from it.
a report of a most alarming nature reached me two days ago.
i was told, that not only your sister was on the point of being most advantageously married, but that youthat miss elizabeth bennet would, in all likelihood, be soon afterwards united to my nephewmy own nephew, mr. darcy.
though i know it must be a scandalous falsehood, though i would not injure him so much as to suppose the truth of it possible, i instantly resolved on setting off for this place, that i might make my sentiments known to you.
if you believed it impossible to be true, said elizabeth, colouring with astonishment and disdain, i wonder you took the trouble of coming so far.
what could your ladyship propose by it?
at once to insist upon having such a report universally contradicted.
your coming to longbourn, to see me and my family, said elizabeth coolly, will be rather a confirmation of itif, indeed, such a report is in existence.
if!
do you then pretend to be ignorant of it?
has it not been industriously circulated by yourselves?
do you not know that such a report is spread abroad?
i never heard that it was.
and can you likewise declare, that there is no foundation for it?
i do not pretend to possess equal frankness with your ladyship.
you may ask questions which i shall not choose to answer.
this is not to be borne.
miss bennet, i insist on being satisfied.
has he, has my nephew, made you an offer of marriage?
your ladyship has declared it to be impossible.
it ought to be so; it must be so, while he retains the use of his reason.
but your arts and allurements may, in a moment of infatuation, have made him forget what he owes to himself and to all his family.
you may have drawn him in.
if i have, i shall be the last person to confess it.
miss bennet, do you know who i am?
i have not been accustomed to such language as this.
i am almost the nearest relation he has in the world, and am entitled to know all his dearest concerns.
but you are not entitled to know mine; nor will such behaviour as this ever induce me to be explicit.
let me be rightly understood.
this match, to which you have the presumption to aspire, can never take place.
no, never.
mr. darcy is engaged to my daughter.
now, what have you to say?
only this,that if he is so, you can have no reason to suppose he will make an offer to me.
lady catherine hesitated for a moment, and then replied, the engagement between them is of a peculiar kind.
from their infancy, they have been intended for each other.
it was the favourite wish of his mother, as well as of hers.
while in their cradles we planned the union; and now, at the moment when the wishes of both sisters would be accomplished, is their marriage to be prevented by a young woman of inferior birth, of no importance in the world, and wholly unallied to the family?
do you pay no regard to the wishes of his friendsto his tacit engagement with miss de bourgh?
are you lost to every feeling of propriety and delicacy?
have you not heard me say, that from his earliest hours he was destined for his cousin?
yes; and i had heard it before.
but what is that to me?
if there is no other objection to my marrying your nephew, i shall certainly not be kept from it by knowing that his mother and aunt wished him to marry miss de bourgh.
you both did as much as you could in planning the marriage.
its completion depended on others.
if mr. darcy is neither by honour nor inclination confined to his cousin, why is not he to make another choice?
and if i am that choice, why may not i accept him?
because honour, decorum, prudencenay, interestforbid it.
yes, miss bennet, interest; for do not expect to be noticed by his family or friends, if you wilfully act against the inclinations of all.
you will be censured, slighted, and despised, by everyone connected with him.
your alliance will be a disgrace; your name will never even be mentioned by any of us.
these are heavy misfortunes, replied elizabeth.
but the wife of mr. darcy must have such extraordinary sources of happiness necessarily attached to her situation, that she could, upon the whole, have no cause to repine.
obstinate, headstrong girl!
i am ashamed of you!
is this your gratitude for my attentions to you last spring?
is nothing due to me on that score?
let us sit down.
you are to understand, miss bennet, that i came here with the determined resolution of carrying my purpose; nor will i be dissuaded from it.
i have not been used to submit to any persons whims.
i have not been in the habit of brooking disappointment.
that will make your ladyships situation at present more pitiable; but it will have no effect on me.
i will not be interrupted!
hear me in silence.
my daughter and my nephew are formed for each other.
they are descended, on the maternal side, from the same noble line; and, on the fathers, from respectable, honourable, and ancient, though untitled, families.
their fortune on both sides is splendid.
they are destined for each other by the voice of every member of their respective houses; and what is to divide them?the upstart pretensions of a young woman without family, connections, or fortune!
is this to be endured?
but it must not, shall not be!
if you were sensible of your own good, you would not wish to quit the sphere in which you have been brought up.
in marrying your nephew, i should not consider myself as quitting that sphere.
he is a gentleman; i am a gentlemans daughter; so far we are equal.
true.
you are a gentlemans daughter.
but what was your mother?
who are your uncles and aunts?
do not imagine me ignorant of their condition.
whatever my connections may be, said elizabeth, if your nephew does not object to them, they can be nothing to you.
tell me, once for all, are you engaged to him?
though elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging lady catherine, have answered this question, she could not but say, after a moments deliberation, i am not.
lady catherine seemed pleased.
and will you promise me never to enter into such an engagement?
i will make no promise of the kind.
miss bennet, i am shocked and astonished.
i expected to find a more reasonable young woman.
but do not deceive yourself into a belief that i will ever recede.
i shall not go away till you have given me the assurance i require.
and i certainly never shall give it.
i am not to be intimidated into anything so wholly unreasonable.
your ladyship wants mr. darcy to marry your daughter; but would my giving you the wishedfor promise make their marriage at all more probable?
supposing him to be attached to me, would my refusing to accept his hand make him wish to bestow it on his cousin?
allow me to say, lady catherine, that the arguments with which you have supported this extraordinary application have been as frivolous as the application was illjudged.
you have widely mistaken my character, if you think i can be worked on by such persuasions as these.
how far your nephew might approve of your interference in his affairs, i cannot tell; but you have certainly no right to concern yourself in mine.
i must beg, therefore, to be importuned no further on the subject.
not so hasty, if you please.
i have by no means done.
to all the objections i have already urged i have still another to add.
i am no stranger to the particulars of your youngest sisters infamous elopement.
i know it all; that the young mans marrying her was a patchedup business, at the expense of your father and uncle.
and is such a girl to be my nephews sister?
is her husband, who is the son of his late fathers steward, to be his brother?
heaven and earth!of what are you thinking?
are the shades of pemberley to be thus polluted?
you can now have nothing further to say, she resentfully answered.
you have insulted me, in every possible method.
i must beg to return to the house.
and she rose as she spoke.
lady catherine rose also, and they turned back.
her ladyship was highly incensed.
you have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my nephew!
unfeeling, selfish girl!
do you not consider that a connection with you must disgrace him in the eyes of everybody?
lady catherine, i have nothing further to say.
you know my sentiments.
you are then resolved to have him?
i have said no such thing.
i am only resolved to act in that manner, which will, in my own opinion, constitute my happiness, without reference to you, or to any person so wholly unconnected with me.
it is well.
you refuse, then, to oblige me.
you refuse to obey the claims of duty, honour, and gratitude.
you are determined to ruin him in the opinion of all his friends, and make him the contempt of the world.
neither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude, replied elizabeth, has any possible claim on me, in the present instance.
no principle of either would be violated by my marriage with mr. darcy.
and with regard to the resentment of his family, or the indignation of the world, if the former were excited by his marrying me, it would not give me one moments concernand the world in general would have too much sense to join in the scorn.
and this is your real opinion!
this is your final resolve!
very well.
i shall now know how to act.
do not imagine, miss bennet, that your ambition will ever be gratified.
i came to try you.
i hoped to find you reasonable; but depend upon it i will carry my point.
in this manner lady catherine talked on till they were at the door of the carriage, when, turning hastily round, she added, i take no leave of you, miss bennet.
i send no compliments to your mother.
you deserve no such attention.
i am most seriously displeased.
elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade her ladyship to return into the house, walked quietly into it herself.
she heard the carriage drive away as she proceeded upstairs.
her mother impatiently met her at the door of her dressingroom, to ask why lady catherine would not come in again and rest herself.
she did not choose it, said her daughter; she would go.
she is a very finelooking woman!
and her calling here was prodigiously civil!
for she only came, i suppose, to tell us the collinses were well.
she is on her road somewhere, i dare say; and so, passing through meryton, thought she might as well call on you.
i suppose she had nothing particular to say to you, lizzy?
elizabeth was forced to give in to a little falsehood here; for to acknowledge the substance of their conversation was impossible.
illustration: but now it comes out  chapter lvii.
illustration the discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw elizabeth into could not be easily overcome; nor could she for many hours learn to think of it less than incessantly.
lady catherine, it appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this journey from rosings for the sole purpose of breaking off her supposed engagement with mr. darcy.
it was a rational scheme, to be sure!
but from what the report of their engagement could originate, elizabeth was at a loss to imagine; till she recollected that his being the intimate friend of bingley, and her being the sister of jane, was enough, at a time when the expectation of one wedding made everybody eager for another, to supply the idea.
she had not herself forgotten to feel that the marriage of her sister must bring them more frequently together.
and her neighbours at lucas lodge, therefore, (for through their communication with the collinses, the report, she concluded, had reached lady catherine,) had only set that down as almost certain and immediate which she had looked forward to as possible at some future time.
in revolving lady catherines expressions, however, she could not help feeling some uneasiness as to the possible consequence of her persisting in this interference.
from what she had said of her resolution to prevent the marriage, it occurred to elizabeth that she must meditate an application to her nephew; and how he might take a similar representation of the evils attached to a connection with her she dared not pronounce.
she knew not the exact degree of his affection for his aunt, or his dependence on her judgment, but it was natural to suppose that he thought much higher of her ladyship than she could do; and it was certain, that in enumerating the miseries of a marriage with one whose immediate connections were so unequal to his own, his aunt would address him on his weakest side.
with his notions of dignity, he would probably feel that the arguments, which to elizabeth had appeared weak and ridiculous, contained much good sense and solid reasoning.
if he had been wavering before, as to what he should do, which had often seemed likely, the advice and entreaty of so near a relation might settle every doubt, and determine him at once to be as happy as dignity unblemished could make him.
in that case he would return no more.
lady catherine might see him in her way through town; and his engagement to bingley of coming again to netherfield must give way.
if, therefore, an excuse for not keeping his promise should come to his friend within a few days, she added, i shall know how to understand it.
i shall then give over every expectation, every wish of his constancy.
if he is satisfied with only regretting me, when he might have obtained my affections and hand, i shall soon cease to regret him at all.
the surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing who their visitor had been, was very great: but they obligingly satisfied it with the same kind of supposition which had appeased mrs. bennets curiosity; and elizabeth was spared from much teasing on the subject.
the next morning, as she was going down stairs, she was met by her father, who came out of his library with a letter in his hand.
lizzy, said he, i was going to look for you: come into my room.
she followed him thither; and her curiosity to know what he had to tell her was heightened by the supposition of its being in some manner connected with the letter he held.
it suddenly struck her that it might be from lady catherine, and she anticipated with dismay all the consequent explanations.
she followed her father to the fireplace, and they both sat down.
he then said, i have received a letter this morning that has astonished me exceedingly.
as it principally concerns yourself, you ought to know its contents.
i did not know before that i had two daughters on the brink of matrimony.
let me congratulate you on a very important conquest.
the colour now rushed into elizabeths cheeks in the instantaneous conviction of its being a letter from the nephew, instead of the aunt; and she was undetermined whether most to be pleased that he explained himself at all, or offended that his letter was not rather addressed to herself, when her father continued, you look conscious.
young ladies have great penetration in such matters as these; but i think i may defy even your sagacity to discover the name of your admirer.
this letter is from mr. collins.
from mr. collins!
and what can he have to say?
something very much to the purpose, of course.
he begins with congratulations on the approaching nuptials of my eldest daughter, of which, it seems, he has been told by some of the goodnatured, gossiping lucases.
i shall not sport with your impatience by reading what he says on that point.
what relates to yourself is as follows:having thus offered you the sincere congratulations of mrs. collins and myself on this happy event, let me now add a short hint on the subject of another, of which we have been advertised by the same authority.
your daughter elizabeth, it is presumed, will not long bear the name of bennet, after her eldest sister has resigned it; and the chosen partner of her fate may be reasonably looked up to as one of the most illustrious personages in this land.
can you possibly guess, lizzy, who is meant by this?
this young gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar way, with everything the heart of mortal can most desire,splendid property, noble kindred, and extensive patronage.
yet, in spite of all these temptations, let me warn my cousin elizabeth, and yourself, of what evils you may incur by a precipitate closure with this gentlemans proposals, which, of course, you will be inclined to take immediate advantage of.
have you any idea, lizzy, who this gentleman is?
but now it comes out.
my motive for cautioning you is as follows:we have reason to imagine that his aunt, lady catherine de bourgh, does not look on the match with a friendly eye.
mr. darcy, you see, is the man!
now, lizzy, i think i have surprised you.
could he, or the lucases, have pitched on any man, within the circle of our acquaintance, whose name would have given the lie more effectually to what they related?
mr. darcy, who never looks at any woman but to see a blemish, and who probably never looked at you in his life!
it is admirable!
elizabeth tried to join in her fathers pleasantry, but could only force one most reluctant smile.
never had his wit been directed in a manner so little agreeable to her.
are you not diverted?
oh, yes.
pray read on.
after mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to her ladyship last night, she immediately, with her usual condescension, expressed what she felt on the occasion; when it became apparent, that, on the score of some family objections on the part of my cousin, she would never give her consent to what she termed so disgraceful a match.
i thought it my duty to give the speediest intelligence of this to my cousin, that she and her noble admirer may be aware of what they are about, and not run hastily into a marriage which has not been properly sanctioned.
mr. collins, moreover, adds, i am truly rejoiced that my cousin lydias sad business has been so well hushed up, and am only concerned that their living together before the marriage took place should be so generally known.
i must not, however, neglect the duties of my station, or refrain from declaring my amazement, at hearing that you received the young couple into your house as soon as they were married.
it was an encouragement of vice; and had i been the rector of longbourn, i should very strenuously have opposed it.
you ought certainly to forgive them as a christian, but never to admit them in your sight, or allow their names to be mentioned in your hearing.
that is his notion of christian forgiveness!
the rest of his letter is only about his dear charlottes situation, and his expectation of a young olivebranch.
but, lizzy, you look as if you did not enjoy it.
you are not going to be missish, i hope, and pretend to be affronted at an idle report.
for what do we live, but to make sport for our neighbours, and laugh at them in our turn?
oh, cried elizabeth, i am exceedingly diverted.
but it is so strange!
yes, that is what makes it amusing.
had they fixed on any other man it would have been nothing; but his perfect indifference and your pointed dislike make it so delightfully absurd!
much as i abominate writing, i would not give up mr. collinss correspondence for any consideration.
nay, when i read a letter of his, i cannot help giving him the preference even over wickham, much as i value the impudence and hypocrisy of my soninlaw.
and pray, lizzy, what said lady catherine about this report?
did she call to refuse her consent?
to this question his daughter replied only with a laugh; and as it had been asked without the least suspicion, she was not distressed by his repeating it.
elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make her feelings appear what they were not.
it was necessary to laugh when she would rather have cried.
her father had most cruelly mortified her by what he said of mr. darcys indifference; and she could do nothing but wonder at such a want of penetration, or fear that, perhaps, instead of his seeing too little, she might have fancied too much.
illustration: the efforts of his aunt copyright 1894 by george allen.
chapter lviii.
illustration instead of receiving any such letter of excuse from his friend, as elizabeth half expected mr. bingley to do, he was able to bring darcy with him to longbourn before many days had passed after lady catherines visit.
the gentlemen arrived early; and, before mrs. bennet had time to tell him of their having seen his aunt, of which her daughter sat in momentary dread, bingley, who wanted to be alone with jane, proposed their all walking out.
it was agreed to.
mrs. bennet was not in the habit of walking, mary could never spare time, but the remaining five set off together.
bingley and jane, however, soon allowed the others to outstrip them.
they lagged behind, while elizabeth, kitty, and darcy were to entertain each other.
very little was said by either; kitty was too much afraid of him to talk; elizabeth was secretly forming a desperate resolution; and, perhaps, he might be doing the same.
they walked towards the lucases, because kitty wished to call upon maria; and as elizabeth saw no occasion for making it a general concern, when kitty left them she went boldly on with him alone.
now was the moment for her resolution to be executed; and while her courage was high, she immediately said, mr. darcy, i am a very selfish creature, and for the sake of giving relief to my own feelings care not how much i may be wounding yours.
i can no longer help thanking you for your unexampled kindness to my poor sister.
ever since i have known it i have been most anxious to acknowledge to you how gratefully i feel it.
were it known to the rest of my family i should not have merely my own gratitude to express.
i am sorry, exceedingly sorry, replied darcy, in a tone of surprise and emotion, that you have ever been informed of what may, in a mistaken light, have given you uneasiness.
i did not think mrs. gardiner was so little to be trusted.
you must not blame my aunt.
lydias thoughtlessness first betrayed to me that you had been concerned in the matter; and, of course, i could not rest till i knew the particulars.
let me thank you again and again, in the name of all my family, for that generous compassion which induced you to take so much trouble, and bear so many mortifications, for the sake of discovering them.
if you will thank me, he replied, let it be for yourself alone.
that the wish of giving happiness to you might add force to the other inducements which led me on, i shall not attempt to deny.
but your family owe me nothing.
much as i respect them, i believe i thought only of you.
elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word.
after a short pause, her companion added, you are too generous to trifle with me.
if your feelings are still what they were last april, tell me so at once.
my affections and wishes are unchanged; but one word from you will silence me on this subject for ever.
elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of his situation, now forced herself to speak; and immediately, though not very fluently, gave him to understand that her sentiments had undergone so material a change since the period to which he alluded, as to make her receive with gratitude and pleasure his present assurances.
the happiness which this reply produced was such as he had probably never felt before; and he expressed himself on the occasion as sensibly and as warmly as a man violently in love can be supposed to do.
had elizabeth been able to encounter his eyes, she might have seen how well the expression of heartfelt delight diffused over his face became him: but though she could not look she could listen; and he told her of feelings which, in proving of what importance she was to him, made his affection every moment more valuable.
they walked on without knowing in what direction.
there was too much to be thought, and felt, and said, for attention to any other objects.
she soon learnt that they were indebted for their present good understanding to the efforts of his aunt, who did call on him in her return through london, and there relate her journey to longbourn, its motive, and the substance of her conversation with elizabeth; dwelling emphatically on every expression of the latter, which, in her ladyships apprehension, peculiarly denoted her perverseness and assurance, in the belief that such a relation must assist her endeavours to obtain that promise from her nephew which she had refused to give.
but, unluckily for her ladyship, its effect had been exactly contrariwise.
it taught me to hope, said he, as i had scarcely ever allowed myself to hope before.
i knew enough of your disposition to be certain, that had you been absolutely, irrevocably decided against me, you would have acknowledged it to lady catherine frankly and openly.
elizabeth coloured and laughed as she replied, yes, you know enough of my frankness to believe me capable of that.
after abusing you so abominably to your face, i could have no scruple in abusing you to all your relations.
what did you say of me that i did not deserve?
for though your accusations were illfounded, formed on mistaken premises, my behaviour to you at the time had merited the severest reproof.
it was unpardonable.
i cannot think of it without abhorrence.
we will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to that evening, said elizabeth.
the conduct of neither, if strictly examined, will be irreproachable; but since then we have both, i hope, improved in civility.
i cannot be so easily reconciled to myself.
the recollection of what i then said, of my conduct, my manners, my expressions during the whole of it, is now, and has been many months, inexpressibly painful to me.
your reproof, so well applied, i shall never forget: had you behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner.
those were your words.
you know not, you can scarcely conceive, how they have tortured me; though it was some time, i confess, before i was reasonable enough to allow their justice.
i was certainly very far from expecting them to make so strong an impression.
i had not the smallest idea of their being ever felt in such a way.
i can easily believe it.
you thought me then devoid of every proper feeling, i am sure you did.
the turn of your countenance i shall never forget, as you said that i could not have addressed you in any possible way that would induce you to accept me.
oh, do not repeat what i then said.
these recollections will not do at all.
i assure you that i have long been most heartily ashamed of it.
darcy mentioned his letter.
did it, said he,did it soon make you think better of me?
did you, on reading it, give any credit to its contents?
she explained what its effects on her had been, and how gradually all her former prejudices had been removed.
i knew, said he, that what i wrote must give you pain, but it was necessary.
i hope you have destroyed the letter.
there was one part, especially the opening of it, which i should dread your having the power of reading again.
i can remember some expressions which might justly make you hate me.
the letter shall certainly be burnt, if you believe it essential to the preservation of my regard; but, though we have both reason to think my opinions not entirely unalterable, they are not, i hope, quite so easily changed as that implies.
when i wrote that letter, replied darcy, i believed myself perfectly calm and cool; but i am since convinced that it was written in a dreadful bitterness of spirit.
the letter, perhaps, began in bitterness, but it did not end so.
the adieu is charity itself.
but think no more of the letter.
the feelings of the person who wrote and the person who received it are now so widely different from what they were then, that every unpleasant circumstance attending it ought to be forgotten.
you must learn some of my philosophy.
think only of the past as its remembrance gives you pleasure.
i cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the kind.
your retrospections must be so totally void of reproach, that the contentment arising from them is not of philosophy, but, what is much better, of ignorance.
but with me, it is not so.
painful recollections will intrude, which cannot, which ought not to be repelled.
i have been a selfish being all my life, in practice, though not in principle.
as a child i was taught what was right, but i was not taught to correct my temper.
i was given good principles, but left to follow them in pride and conceit.
unfortunately an only son (for many years an only child), i was spoiled by my parents, who, though good themselves, (my father particularly, all that was benevolent and amiable,) allowed, encouraged, almost taught me to be selfish and overbearing, to care for none beyond my own family circle, to think meanly of all the rest of the world, to wish at least to think meanly of their sense and worth compared with my own.
such i was, from eight to eightandtwenty; and such i might still have been but for you, dearest, loveliest elizabeth!
what do i not owe you!
you taught me a lesson, hard indeed at first, but most advantageous.
by you, i was properly humbled.
i came to you without a doubt of my reception.
you showed me how insufficient were all my pretensions to please a woman worthy of being pleased.
had you then persuaded yourself that i should?
indeed i had.
what will you think of my vanity?
i believed you to be wishing, expecting my addresses.
my manners must have been in fault, but not intentionally, i assure you.
i never meant to deceive you, but my spirits might often lead me wrong.
how you must have hated me after that evening!
hate you!
i was angry, perhaps, at first, but my anger soon began to take a proper direction.
i am almost afraid of asking what you thought of me when we met at pemberley.
you blamed me for coming?
no, indeed, i felt nothing but surprise.
your surprise could not be greater than mine in being noticed by you.
my conscience told me that i deserved no extraordinary politeness, and i confess that i did not expect to receive more than my due.
my object then, replied darcy, was to show you, by every civility in my power, that i was not so mean as to resent the past; and i hoped to obtain your forgiveness, to lessen your ill opinion, by letting you see that your reproofs had been attended to.
how soon any other wishes introduced themselves, i can hardly tell, but i believe in about half an hour after i had seen you.
he then told her of georgianas delight in her acquaintance, and of her disappointment at its sudden interruption; which naturally leading to the cause of that interruption, she soon learnt that his resolution of following her from derbyshire in quest of her sister had been formed before he quitted the inn, and that his gravity and thoughtfulness there had arisen from no other struggles than what such a purpose must comprehend.
she expressed her gratitude again, but it was too painful a subject to each to be dwelt on farther.
after walking several miles in a leisurely manner, and too busy to know anything about it, they found at last, on examining their watches, that it was time to be at home.
what could have become of mr. bingley and jane?
was a wonder which introduced the discussion of their affairs.
darcy was delighted with their engagement; his friend had given him the earliest information of it.
i must ask whether you were surprised?
said elizabeth.
not at all.
when i went away, i felt that it would soon happen.
that is to say, you had given your permission.
i guessed as much.
and though he exclaimed at the term, she found that it had been pretty much the case.
on the evening before my going to london, said he, i made a confession to him, which i believe i ought to have made long ago.
i told him of all that had occurred to make my former interference in his affairs absurd and impertinent.
his surprise was great.
he had never had the slightest suspicion.
i told him, moreover, that i believed myself mistaken in supposing, as i had done, that your sister was indifferent to him; and as i could easily perceive that his attachment to her was unabated, i felt no doubt of their happiness together.
elizabeth could not help smiling at his easy manner of directing his friend.
did you speak from your own observation, said she, when you told him that my sister loved him, or merely from my information last spring?
from the former.
i had narrowly observed her, during the two visits which i had lately made her here; and i was convinced of her affection.
and your assurance of it, i suppose, carried immediate conviction to him.
it did.
bingley is most unaffectedly modest.
his diffidence had prevented his depending on his own judgment in so anxious a case, but his reliance on mine made everything easy.
i was obliged to confess one thing, which for a time, and not unjustly, offended him.
i could not allow myself to conceal that your sister had been in town three months last winter, that i had known it, and purposely kept it from him.
he was angry.
but his anger, i am persuaded, lasted no longer than he remained in any doubt of your sisters sentiments.
he has heartily forgiven me now.
elizabeth longed to observe that mr. bingley had been a most delightful friend; so easily guided that his worth was invaluable; but she checked herself.
she remembered that he had yet to learn to be laughed at, and it was rather too early to begin.
in anticipating the happiness of bingley, which of course was to be inferior only to his own, he continued the conversation till they reached the house.
in the hall they parted.
illustration: unable to utter a syllable copyright 1894 by george allen.
chapter lix.
illustration my dear lizzy, where can you have been walking to?
was a question which elizabeth received from jane as soon as she entered the room, and from all the others when they sat down to table.
she had only to say in reply, that they had wandered about till she was beyond her own knowledge.
she coloured as she spoke; but neither that, nor anything else, awakened a suspicion of the truth.
the evening passed quietly, unmarked by anything extraordinary.
the acknowledged lovers talked and laughed; the unacknowledged were silent.
darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in mirth; and elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather knew that she was happy than felt herself to be so; for, besides the immediate embarrassment, there were other evils before her.
she anticipated what would be felt in the family when her situation became known: she was aware that no one liked him but jane; and even feared that with the others it was a dislike which not all his fortune and consequence might do away.
at night she opened her heart to jane.
though suspicion was very far from miss bennets general habits, she was absolutely incredulous here.
you are joking, lizzy.
this cannot be!
engaged to mr. darcy!
no, no, you shall not deceive me: i know it to be impossible.
this is a wretched beginning, indeed!
my sole dependence was on you; and i am sure nobody else will believe me, if you do not.
yet, indeed, i am in earnest.
i speak nothing but the truth.
he still loves me, and we are engaged.
jane looked at her doubtingly.
oh, lizzy!
it cannot be.
i know how much you dislike him.
you know nothing of the matter.
that is all to be forgot.
perhaps i did not always love him so well as i do now; but in such cases as these a good memory is unpardonable.
this is the last time i shall ever remember it myself.
miss bennet still looked all amazement.
elizabeth again, and more seriously, assured her of its truth.
good heaven!
can it be really so?
yet now i must believe you, cried jane.
my dear, dear lizzy, i would, i do congratulate you; but are you certainforgive the questionare you quite certain that you can be happy with him?
there can be no doubt of that.
it is settled between us already that we are to be the happiest couple in the world.
but are you pleased, jane?
shall you like to have such a brother?
very, very much.
nothing could give either bingley or myself more delight.
but we considered it, we talked of it as impossible.
and do you really love him quite well enough?
oh, lizzy!
do anything rather than marry without affection.
are you quite sure that you feel what you ought to do?
oh, yes!
you will only think i feel more than i ought to do when i tell you all.
what do you mean?
why, i must confess that i love him better than i do bingley.
i am afraid you will be angry.
my dearest sister, now be, be serious.
i want to talk very seriously.
let me know everything that i am to know without delay.
will you tell me how long you have loved him?
it has been coming on so gradually, that i hardly know when it began; but i believe i must date it from my first seeing his beautiful grounds at pemberley.
another entreaty that she would be serious, however, produced the desired effect; and she soon satisfied jane by her solemn assurances of attachment.
when convinced on that article, miss bennet had nothing further to wish.
now i am quite happy, said she, for you will be as happy as myself.
i always had a value for him.
were it for nothing but his love of you, i must always have esteemed him; but now, as bingleys friend and your husband, there can be only bingley and yourself more dear to me.
but, lizzy, you have been very sly, very reserved with me.
how little did you tell me of what passed at pemberley and lambton!
i owe all that i know of it to another, not to you.
elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy.
she had been unwilling to mention bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feelings had made her equally avoid the name of his friend: but now she would no longer conceal from her his share in lydias marriage.
all was acknowledged, and half the night spent in conversation.
good gracious!
cried mrs. bennet, as she stood at a window the next morning, if that disagreeable mr. darcy is not coming here again with our dear bingley!
what can he mean by being so tiresome as to be always coming here?
i had no notion but he would go ashooting, or something or other, and not disturb us with his company.
what shall we do with him?
lizzy, you must walk out with him again, that he may not be in bingleys way.
elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal; yet was really vexed that her mother should be always giving him such an epithet.
as soon as they entered, bingley looked at her so expressively, and shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt of his good information; and he soon afterwards said aloud, mrs. bennet, have you no more lanes hereabouts in which lizzy may lose her way again today?
i advise mr. darcy, and lizzy, and kitty, said mrs. bennet, to walk to oakham mount this morning.
it is a nice long walk, and mr. darcy has never seen the view.
it may do very well for the others, replied mr. bingley; but i am sure it will be too much for kitty.
wont it, kitty?
kitty owned that she had rather stay at home.
darcy professed a great curiosity to see the view from the mount, and elizabeth silently consented.
as she went upstairs to get ready, mrs. bennet followed her, saying, i am quite sorry, lizzy, that you should be forced to have that disagreeable man all to yourself; but i hope you will not mind it.
it is all for janes sake, you know; and there is no occasion for talking to him except just now and then; so do not put yourself to inconvenience.
during their walk, it was resolved that mr. bennets consent should be asked in the course of the evening: elizabeth reserved to herself the application for her mothers.
she could not determine how her mother would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man; but whether she were violently set against the match, or violently delighted with it, it was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to her sense; and she could no more bear that mr. darcy should hear the first raptures of her joy, than the first vehemence of her disapprobation.
in the evening, soon after mr. bennet withdrew to the library, she saw mr. darcy rise also and follow him, and her agitation on seeing it was extreme.
she did not fear her fathers opposition, but he was going to be made unhappy, and that it should be through her means; that she, his favourite child, should be distressing him by her choice, should be filling him with fears and regrets in disposing of her, was a wretched reflection, and she sat in misery till mr. darcy appeared again, when, looking at him, she was a little relieved by his smile.
in a few minutes he approached the table where she was sitting with kitty; and, while pretending to admire her work, said in a whisper, go to your father; he wants you in the library.
she was gone directly.
her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious.
lizzy, said he, what are you doing?
are you out of your senses to be accepting this man?
have not you always hated him?
how earnestly did she then wish that her former opinions had been more reasonable, her expressions more moderate!
it would have spared her from explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give; but they were now necessary, and she assured him, with some confusion, of her attachment to mr. darcy.
or, in other words, you are determined to have him.
he is rich, to be sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than jane.
but will they make you happy?
have you any other objection, said elizabeth, than your belief of my indifference?
none at all.
we all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of man; but this would be nothing if you really liked him.
i do, i do like him, she replied, with tears in her eyes; i love him.
indeed he has no improper pride.
he is perfectly amiable.
you do not know what he really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him in such terms.
lizzy, said her father, i have given him my consent.
he is the kind of man, indeed, to whom i should never dare refuse anything, which he condescended to ask.
i now give it to you, if you are resolved on having him.
but let me advise you to think better of it.
i know your disposition, lizzy.
i know that you could be neither happy nor respectable, unless you truly esteemed your husband, unless you looked up to him as a superior.
your lively talents would place you in the greatest danger in an unequal marriage.
you could scarcely escape discredit and misery.
my child, let me not have the grief of seeing you unable to respect your partner in life.
you know not what you are about.
elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in her reply; and, at length, by repeated assurances that mr. darcy was really the object of her choice, by explaining the gradual change which her estimation of him had undergone, relating her absolute certainty that his affection was not the work of a day, but had stood the test of many months suspense, and enumerating with energy all his good qualities, she did conquer her fathers incredulity, and reconcile him to the match.
well, my dear, said he, when she ceased speaking, i have no more to say.
if this be the case, he deserves you.
i could not have parted with you, my lizzy, to anyone less worthy.
to complete the favourable impression, she then told him what mr. darcy had voluntarily done for lydia.
he heard her with astonishment.
this is an evening of wonders, indeed!
and so, darcy did everything; made up the match, gave the money, paid the fellows debts, and got him his commission!
so much the better.
it will save me a world of trouble and economy.
had it been your uncles doing, i must and would have paid him; but these violent young lovers carry everything their own way.
i shall offer to pay him tomorrow, he will rant and storm about his love for you, and there will be an end of the matter.
he then recollected her embarrassment a few days before on his reading mr. collinss letter; and after laughing at her some time, allowed her at last to go, saying, as she quitted the room, if any young men come for mary or kitty, send them in, for i am quite at leisure.
elizabeths mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and, after half an hours quiet reflection in her own room, she was able to join the others with tolerable composure.
everything was too recent for gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away; there was no longer anything material to be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity would come in time.
when her mother went up to her dressingroom at night, she followed her, and made the important communication.
its effect was most extraordinary; for, on first hearing it, mrs. bennet sat quite still, and unable to utter a syllable.
nor was it under many, many minutes, that she could comprehend what she heard, though not in general backward to credit what was for the advantage of her family, or that came in the shape of a lover to any of them.
she began at length to recover, to fidget about in her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless herself.
good gracious!
lord bless me!
only think!
dear me!
mr. darcy!
who would have thought it?
and is it really true?
oh, my sweetest lizzy!
how rich and how great you will be!
what pinmoney, what jewels, what carriages you will have!
janes is nothing to itnothing at all.
i am so pleasedso happy.
such a charming man!
so handsome!
so tall!
oh, my dear lizzy!
pray apologize for my having disliked him so much before.
i hope he will overlook it.
dear, dear lizzy.
a house in town!
everything that is charming!
three daughters married!
ten thousand a year!
oh, lord!
what will become of me?
i shall go distracted.
this was enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubted; and elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by herself, soon went away.
but before she had been three minutes in her own room, her mother followed her.
my dearest child, she cried, i can think of nothing else.
ten thousand a year, and very likely more!
tis as good as a lord!
and a special licenceyou must and shall be married by a special licence.
but, my dearest love, tell me what dish mr. darcy is particularly fond of, that i may have it tomorrow.
this was a sad omen of what her mothers behaviour to the gentleman himself might be; and elizabeth found that, though in the certain possession of his warmest affection, and secure of her relations consent, there was still something to be wished for.
but the morrow passed off much better than she expected; for mrs. bennet luckily stood in such awe of her intended soninlaw, that she ventured not to speak to him, unless it was in her power to offer him any attention, or mark her deference for his opinion.
elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to get acquainted with him; and mr. bennet soon assured her that he was rising every hour in his esteem.
i admire all my three sonsinlaw highly, said he.
wickham, perhaps, is my favourite; but i think i shall like your husband quite as well as janes.
illustration: the obsequious civility.
copyright 1894 by george allen.
chapter lx.
illustration elizabeths spirits soon rising to playfulness again, she wanted mr. darcy to account for his having ever fallen in love with her.
how could you begin?
said she.
i can comprehend your going on charmingly, when you had once made a beginning; but what could set you off in the first place?
i cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words, which laid the foundation.
it is too long ago.
i was in the middle before i knew that i had begun.
my beauty you had early withstood, and as for my mannersmy behaviour to you was at least always bordering on the uncivil, and i never spoke to you without rather wishing to give you pain than not.
now, be sincere; did you admire me for my impertinence?
for the liveliness of your mind i did.
you may as well call it impertinence at once.
it was very little less.
the fact is, that you were sick of civility, of deference, of officious attention.
you were disgusted with the women who were always speaking, and looking, and thinking for your approbation alone.
i roused and interested you, because i was so unlike them.
had you not been really amiable you would have hated me for it: but in spite of the pains you took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and in your heart you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously courted you.
therei have saved you the trouble of accounting for it; and really, all things considered, i begin to think it perfectly reasonable.
to be sure you know no actual good of mebut nobody thinks of that when they fall in love.
was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to jane, while she was ill at netherfield?
dearest jane!
who could have done less for her?
but make a virtue of it by all means.
my good qualities are under your protection, and you are to exaggerate them as much as possible; and, in return, it belongs to me to find occasions for teasing and quarrelling with you as often as may be; and i shall begin directly, by asking you what made you so unwilling to come to the point at last?
what made you so shy of me, when you first called, and afterwards dined here?
why, especially, when you called, did you look as if you did not care about me?
because you were grave and silent, and gave me no encouragement.
but i was embarrassed.
and so was i. you might have talked to me more when you came to dinner.
a man who had felt less might.
how unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give, and that i should be so reasonable as to admit it!
but i wonder how long you would have gone on, if you had been left to yourself.
i wonder when you would have spoken if i had not asked you!
my resolution of thanking you for your kindness to lydia had certainly great effect.
too much, i am afraid; for what becomes of the moral, if our comfort springs from a breach of promise, for i ought not to have mentioned the subject?
this will never do.
you need not distress yourself.
the moral will be perfectly fair.
lady catherines unjustifiable endeavours to separate us were the means of removing all my doubts.
i am not indebted for my present happiness to your eager desire of expressing your gratitude.
i was not in a humour to wait for an opening of yours.
my aunts intelligence had given me hope, and i was determined at once to know everything.
lady catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make her happy, for she loves to be of use.
but tell me, what did you come down to netherfield for?
was it merely to ride to longbourn and be embarrassed?
or had you intended any more serious consequences?
my real purpose was to see you, and to judge, if i could, whether i might ever hope to make you love me.
my avowed one, or what i avowed to myself, was to see whether your sister was still partial to bingley, and if she were, to make the confession to him which i have since made.
shall you ever have courage to announce to lady catherine what is to befall her?
i am more likely to want time than courage, elizabeth.
but it ought to be done; and if you will give me a sheet of paper it shall be done directly.
and if i had not a letter to write myself, i might sit by you, and admire the evenness of your writing, as another young lady once did.
but i have an aunt, too, who must not be longer neglected.
from an unwillingness to confess how much her intimacy with mr. darcy had been overrated, elizabeth had never yet answered mrs. gardiners long letter; but now, having that to communicate which she knew would be most welcome, she was almost ashamed to find that her uncle and aunt had already lost three days of happiness, and immediately wrote as follows: i would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as i ought to have done, for your long, kind, satisfactory detail of particulars; but, to say the truth, i was too cross to write.
you supposed more than really existed.
but now suppose as much as you choose; give a loose to your fancy, indulge your imagination in every possible flight which the subject will afford, and unless you believe me actually married, you cannot greatly err.
you must write again very soon, and praise him a great deal more than you did in your last.
i thank you again and again, for not going to the lakes.
how could i be so silly as to wish it!
your idea of the ponies is delightful.
we will go round the park every day.
i am the happiest creature in the world.
perhaps other people have said so before, but no one with such justice.
i am happier even than jane; she only smiles, i laugh.
mr. darcy sends you all the love in the world that can be spared from me.
you are all to come to pemberley at christmas.
yours, etc.
mr. darcys letter to lady catherine was in a different style, and still different from either was what mr. bennet sent to mr. collins, in return for his last.
dear sir,  i must trouble you once more for congratulations.
elizabeth will soon be the wife of mr. darcy.
console lady catherine as well as you can.
but, if i were you, i would stand by the nephew.
he has more to give.
yours sincerely, etc.
miss bingleys congratulations to her brother on his approaching marriage were all that was affectionate and insincere.
she wrote even to jane on the occasion, to express her delight, and repeat all her former professions of regard.
jane was not deceived, but she was affected; and though feeling no reliance on her, could not help writing her a much kinder answer than she knew was deserved.
the joy which miss darcy expressed on receiving similar information was as sincere as her brothers in sending it.
four sides of paper were insufficient to contain all her delight, and all her earnest desire of being loved by her sister.
before any answer could arrive from mr. collins, or any congratulations to elizabeth from his wife, the longbourn family heard that the collinses were come themselves to lucas lodge.
the reason of this sudden removal was soon evident.
lady catherine had been rendered so exceedingly angry by the contents of her nephews letter, that charlotte, really rejoicing in the match, was anxious to get away till the storm was blown over.
at such a moment, the arrival of her friend was a sincere pleasure to elizabeth, though in the course of their meetings she must sometimes think the pleasure dearly bought, when she saw mr. darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of her husband.
he bore it, however, with admirable calmness.
he could even listen to sir william lucas, when he complimented him on carrying away the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed his hopes of their all meeting frequently at st. jamess, with very decent composure.
if he did shrug his shoulders, it was not till sir william was out of sight.
mrs. philipss vulgarity was another, and, perhaps, a greater tax on his forbearance; and though mrs. philips, as well as her sister, stood in too much awe of him to speak with the familiarity which bingleys goodhumour encouraged; yet, whenever she did speak, she must be vulgar.
nor was her respect for him, though it made her more quiet, at all likely to make her more elegant.
elizabeth did all she could to shield him from the frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to keep him to herself, and to those of her family with whom he might converse without mortification; and though the uncomfortable feelings arising from all this took from the season of courtship much of its pleasure, it added to the hope of the future; and she looked forward with delight to the time when they should be removed from society so little pleasing to either, to all the comfort and elegance of their family party at pemberley.
illustration chapter lxi.
illustration happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which mrs. bennet got rid of her two most deserving daughters.
with what delighted pride she afterwards visited mrs. bingley, and talked of mrs. darcy, may be guessed.
i wish i could say, for the sake of her family, that the accomplishment of her earnest desire in the establishment of so many of her children produced so happy an effect as to make her a sensible, amiable, wellinformed woman for the rest of her life; though, perhaps, it was lucky for her husband, who might not have relished domestic felicity in so unusual a form, that she still was occasionally nervous and invariably silly.
mr. bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly; his affection for her drew him oftener from home than anything else could do.
he delighted in going to pemberley, especially when he was least expected.
mr. bingley and jane remained at netherfield only a twelvemonth.
so near a vicinity to her mother and meryton relations was not desirable even to his easy temper, or her affectionate heart.
the darling wish of his sisters was then gratified: he bought an estate in a neighbouring county to derbyshire; and jane and elizabeth, in addition to every other source of happiness, were within thirty miles of each other.
kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her time with her two elder sisters.
in society so superior to what she had generally known, her improvement was great.
she was not of so ungovernable a temper as lydia; and, removed from the influence of lydias example, she became, by proper attention and management, less irritable, less ignorant, and less insipid.
from the further disadvantage of lydias society she was of course carefully kept; and though mrs. wickham frequently invited her to come and stay with her, with the promise of balls and young men, her father would never consent to her going.
mary was the only daughter who remained at home; and she was necessarily drawn from the pursuit of accomplishments by mrs. bennets being quite unable to sit alone.
mary was obliged to mix more with the world, but she could still moralize over every morning visit; and as she was no longer mortified by comparisons between her sisters beauty and her own, it was suspected by her father that she submitted to the change without much reluctance.
as for wickham and lydia, their characters suffered no revolution from the marriage of her sisters.
he bore with philosophy the conviction that elizabeth must now become acquainted with whatever of his ingratitude and falsehood had before been unknown to her; and, in spite of everything, was not wholly without hope that darcy might yet be prevailed on to make his fortune.
the congratulatory letter which elizabeth received from lydia on her marriage explained to her that, by his wife at least, if not by himself, such a hope was cherished.
the letter was to this effect:  my dear lizzy,  i wish you joy.
if you love mr. darcy half so well as i do my dear wickham, you must be very happy.
it is a great comfort to have you so rich; and when you have nothing else to do, i hope you will think of us.
i am sure wickham would like a place at court very much; and i do not think we shall have quite money enough to live upon without some help.
any place would do of about three or four hundred a year; but, however, do not speak to mr. darcy about it, if you had rather not.
yours, etc.
as it happened that elizabeth had much rather not, she endeavoured in her answer to put an end to every entreaty and expectation of the kind.
such relief, however, as it was in her power to afford, by the practice of what might be called economy in her own private expenses, she frequently sent them.
it had always been evident to her that such an income as theirs, under the direction of two persons so extravagant in their wants, and heedless of the future, must be very insufficient to their support; and whenever they changed their quarters, either jane or herself were sure of being applied to for some little assistance towards discharging their bills.
their manner of living, even when the restoration of peace dismissed them to a home, was unsettled in the extreme.
they were always moving from place to place in quest of a cheap situation, and always spending more than they ought.
his affection for her soon sunk into indifference: hers lasted a little longer; and, in spite of her youth and her manners, she retained all the claims to reputation which her marriage had given her.
though darcy could never receive him at pemberley, yet, for elizabeths sake, he assisted him further in his profession.
lydia was occasionally a visitor there, when her husband was gone to enjoy himself in london or bath; and with the bingleys they both of them frequently stayed so long, that even bingleys goodhumour was overcome, and he proceeded so far as to talk of giving them a hint to be gone.
miss bingley was very deeply mortified by darcys marriage; but as she thought it advisable to retain the right of visiting at pemberley, she dropped all her resentment; was fonder than ever of georgiana, almost as attentive to darcy as heretofore, and paid off every arrear of civility to elizabeth.
pemberley was now georgianas home; and the attachment of the sisters was exactly what darcy had hoped to see.
they were able to love each other, even as well as they intended.
georgiana had the highest opinion in the world of elizabeth; though at first she often listened with an astonishment bordering on alarm at her lively, sportive manner of talking to her brother.
he, who had always inspired in herself a respect which almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object of open pleasantry.
her mind received knowledge which had never before fallen in her way.
by elizabeths instructions she began to comprehend that a woman may take liberties with her husband, which a brother will not always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than himself.
lady catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew; and as she gave way to all the genuine frankness of her character, in her reply to the letter which announced its arrangement, she sent him language so very abusive, especially of elizabeth, that for some time all intercourse was at an end.
but at length, by elizabeths persuasion, he was prevailed on to overlook the offence, and seek a reconciliation; and, after a little further resistance on the part of his aunt, her resentment gave way, either to her affection for him, or her curiosity to see how his wife conducted herself; and she condescended to wait on them at pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods had received, not merely from the presence of such a mistress, but the visits of her uncle and aunt from the city.
with the gardiners they were always on the most intimate terms.
darcy, as well as elizabeth, really loved them; and they were both ever sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by bringing her into derbyshire, had been the means of uniting them.
illustration: the end  chiswick press:charles whittingham and co. tooks court, chancery lane, london.
end of the project gutenberg ebook 1342